Rachel Pike : The science behind a climate headline
In 4 minutes , atmospheric chemist Rachel Pike provides a glimpse of the massive scientific effort behind the bold headlines on climate change , with her team  -  -  one of thousands who contributed  -  -  taking a risky flight over the rainforest in pursuit of data on a key molecule .
Id like to talk to you today about the scale of the scientific effort that goes into making the headlines you see in the paper .
Headlines that look like this when they have to do with climate change , and headlines that look like this when they have to do with air quality or smog .
They are both two branches of the same field of atmospheric science .
Recently the headlines looked like this when the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , or IPCC , put out their report on the state of understanding of the atmospheric system .
That report was written by 620 scientists from 40 countries .
They wrote almost a thousand pages on the topic .
And all of those pages were reviewed by another 400 - plus scientists and reviewers , from 113 countries .
Its a big community . Its such a big community , in fact , that our annual gathering is the largest scientific meeting in the world .
Over 15,000 scientists go to San Francisco every year for that .
And every one of those scientists is in a research group , and every research group studies a wide variety of topics .
For us at Cambridge , its as varied as the El Niño oscillation , which affects weather and climate , to the assimilation of satellite data , to emissions from crops that produce biofuels , which is what I happen to study .
And in each one of these research areas , of which there are even more , there are PhD students , like me , and we study incredibly narrow topics , things as narrow as a few processes or a few molecules .
And one of the molecules I study is called isoprene , which is here . Its a small organic molecule . Youve probably never heard of it .
The weight of a paper clip is approximately equal to 900 zeta - illion  -  -  10 to the 21st  -  -  molecules of isoprene .
But despite its very small weight , enough of it is emitted into the atmosphere every year to equal the weight of all the people on the planet .
Its a huge amount of stuff . Its equal to the weight of methane .
And because its so much stuff , its really important for the atmospheric system .
Because its important to the atmospheric system , we go to all lengths to study this thing .
We blow it up and look at the pieces .
This is the EUPHORE Smog Chamber in Spain .
Atmospheric explosions , or full combustion , takes about 15,000 times longer than what happens in your car .
But still , we look at the pieces .
We run enormous models on supercomputers ; this is what I happen to do .
Our models have hundreds of thousands of grid boxes calculating hundreds of variables each , on minute timescales .
And it takes weeks to perform our integrations .
And we perform dozens of integrations in order to understand whats happening .
We also fly all over the world looking for this thing .
I recently joined a field campaign in Malaysia . There are others .
We found a global atmospheric watchtower there , in the middle of the rainforest , and hung hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of scientific equipment off this tower , to look for isoprene , and of course , other things while we were there .
This is the tower in the middle of the rainforest , from above .
And this is the tower from below .
And on part of that field campaign we even brought an aircraft with us .
And this plane , the model , BA146 , which was run by FAAM , normally flies 120 to 130 people .
So maybe you took a similar aircraft to get here today .
But we didnt just fly it . We were flying at 100 meters above the top of the canopy to measure this molecule  -  -  incredibly dangerous stuff .
We have to fly at a special incline in order to make the measurements .
We hire military and test pilots to do the maneuvering .
We have to get special flight clearance .
And as you come around the banks in these valleys , the forces can get up to two Gs .
And the scientists have to be completely harnessed in in order to make measurements while theyre on board .
So , as you can imagine , the inside of this aircraft doesnt look like any plane you would take on vacation .
Its a flying laboratory that we took to make measurements in the region of this molecule .
We do all of this to understand the chemistry of one molecule .
And when one student like me has some sort of inclination or understanding about that molecule , they write one scientific paper on the subject .
And out of that field campaign well probably get a few dozen papers on a few dozen processes or molecules .
And as a body of knowledge builds up , it will form one subsection , or one sub - subsection of an assessment like the IPCC , although we have others .
And each one of the 11 chapters of the IPCC has six to ten subsections .
So you can imagine the scale of the effort .
In each one of those assessments that we write , we always tag on a summary , and the summary is written for a non - scientific audience .
And we hand that summary to journalists and policy makers , in order to make headlines like these .
Thank you very much .
Christopher deCharms : A look inside the brain in real time
Neuroscientist and inventor Christopher deCharms demonstrates a new way to use fMRI to show brain activity  -  -  thoughts , emotions , pain  -  -  while it is happening . In other words , you can actually see how you feel .
Hi . Im going to ask you to raise your arms and wave back , just the way I am  -  -  kind of a royal wave .
You can mimic what you can see .
You can program the hundreds of muscles in your arm .
Soon , youll be able to look inside your brain and program , control the hundreds of brain areas that you see there .
Im going to tell you about that technology .
People have wanted to look inside the human mind , the human brain , for thousands of years .
Well , coming out of the research labs just now , for our generation , is the possibility to do that .
People envision this as being very difficult .
You had to take a spaceship , shrink it down , inject it into the bloodstream .
It was terribly dangerous .
You could be attacked by white blood cells in the arteries .
But now , we have a real technology to do this .
Were going to fly into my colleague Peters brain .
Were going to do it non - invasively using MRI .
We dont have to inject anything . We dont need radiation .
We will be able to fly into the anatomy of Peters brain  -  -  literally , fly into his body  -  -  but more importantly , we can look into his mind .
When Peter moves his arm , that yellow spot you see there is the interface to the functioning of Peters mind taking place .
Now youve seen before that with electrodes you can control robotic arms , that brain imaging and scanners can show you the insides of brains .
Whats new is that that process has typically taken days or months of analysis .
Weve collapsed that through technology to milliseconds , and that allows us to let Peter to look at his brain in real time as hes inside the scanner .
He can look at these 65,000 points of activation per second .
If he can see this pattern in his own brain , he can learn how to control it .
There have been three ways to try to impact the brain : the therapists couch , pills and the knife .
This is a fourth alternative that you are soon going to have .
We all know that as we form thoughts , they form deep channels in our minds and in our brains .
Chronic pain is an example . If you burn yourself , you pull your hand away .
But if youre still in pain in six months or six years time , its because these circuits are producing pain thats no longer helping you .
If we can look at the activation in the brain thats producing the pain , we can form 3D models and watch in real time the brain process information , and then we can select the areas that produce the pain .
So put your arms back up and flex your bicep .
Now imagine that you will soon be able to look inside your brain and select brain areas to do that same thing .
What youre seeing here is , weve selected the pathways in the brain of a chronic pain patient .
This may shock you , but were literally reading this persons brain in real time .
Theyre watching their own brain activation , and theyre controlling the pathway that produces their pain .
Theyre learning to flex this system that releases their own endogenous opiates .
As they do it , in the upper left is a display thats yoked to their brain activation of their own pain being controlled .
When they control their brain , they can control their pain .
This is an investigational technology , but , in clinical trials , were seeing a 44 to 64 percent decrease in chronic pain patients .
This is not  The Matrix .  You can only do this to yourself . You take control .
Ive seen inside my brain . You will too , soon .
When you do , what do you want to control ?
You will be able to look at all the aspects that make you yourself , all your experiences .
These are some of the areas were working on today that I dont have time to go into in detail .
But I want to leave with you the big question .
We are the first generation thats going to be able to enter into , using this technology , the human mind and brain .
Where will we take it ?
Beeban Kidron : The shared wonder of film
Movies have the power to create a shared narrative experience and to shape memories and worldviews . British film director Beeban Kidron invokes iconic film scenes  -  -  from Miracle in Milan to Boyz n the Hood  -  -  as she shows how her group FILMCLUB shares great films with kids .
Evidence suggests that humans in all ages and from all cultures create their identity in some kind of narrative form .
From mother to daughter , preacher to congregant , teacher to pupil , storyteller to audience .
Whether in cave paintings or the latest uses of the Internet , human beings have always told their histories and truths through parable and fable .
We are inveterate storytellers .
But where , in our increasingly secular and fragmented world , do we offer communality of experience , unmediated by our own furious consumerism ?
And what narrative , what history , what identity , what moral code are we imparting to our young ?
Cinema is arguably the 20th centurys most influential art form .
Its artists told stories across national boundaries , in as many languages , genres and philosophies as one can imagine .
Indeed , it is hard to find a subject that film has yet to tackle .
During the last decade weve seen a vast integration of global media , now dominated by a culture of the Hollywood blockbuster .
We are increasingly offered a diet in which sensation , not story , is king .
What was common to us all 40 years ago  -  -  the telling of stories between generations  -  -  is now rarified .
As a filmmaker , it worried me .
As a human being , it puts the fear of God in me .
What future could the young build with so little grasp of where theyve come from and so few narratives of whats possible ?
The irony is palpable ; technical access has never been greater , cultural access never weaker .
And so in 2006 we set up FILMCLUB , an organization that ran weekly film screenings in schools followed by discussions .
If we could raid the annals of 100 years of film , maybe we could build a narrative that would deliver meaning to the fragmented and restless world of the young .
Given the access to technology , even a school in a tiny rural hamlet could project a DVD onto a white board .
In the first nine months we ran 25 clubs across the U.K . , with kids in age groups between five and 18 watching a film uninterrupted for 90 minutes .
The films were curated and contextualized .
But the choice was theirs , and our audience quickly grew to choose the richest and most varied diet that we could provide .
The outcome , immediate .
It was an education of the most profound and transformative kind .
In groups as large as 150 and as small as three , these young people discovered new places , new thoughts , new perspectives .
By the time the pilot had finished , we had the names of a thousand schools that wished to join .
The film that changed my life is a 1951 film by Vittorio De Sica ,  Miracle in Milan . 
Its a remarkable comment on slums , poverty and aspiration .
I had seen the film on the occasion of my fathers 50th birthday .
Technology then meant we had to hire a viewing cinema , find and pay for the print and the projectionist .
But for my father , the emotional and artistic importance of De Sicas vision was so great that he chose to celebrate his half - century with his three teenage children and 30 of their friends ,  In order ,  he said ,  to pass the baton of concern and hope on to the next generation . 
In the last shot of  Miracle in Milan ,  slum - dwellers float skyward on flying brooms .
Sixty years after the film was made and 30 years after I first saw it , I see young faces tilt up in awe , their incredulity matching mine .
And the speed with which they associate it with  Slumdog Millionaire  or the favelas in Rio speaks to the enduring nature .
In a FILMCLUB season about democracy and government , we screened  Mr. Smith Goes to Washington . 
Made in 1939 , the film is older than most of our members grandparents .
Frank Capras classic values independence and propriety .
It shows how to do right , how to be heroically awkward .
It is also an expression of faith in the political machine as a force of honor .
Shortly after  Mr. Smith  became a FILMCLUB classic , there was a week of all - night filibustering in the House of Lords .
And it was with great delight that we found young people up and down the country explaining with authority what filibustering was and why the Lords might defy their bedtime on a point of principle .
After all , Jimmy Stewart filibustered for two entire reels .
In choosing  Hotel Rwanda ,  they explored genocide of the most brutal kind .
It provoked tears as well as incisive questions about unarmed peace - keeping forces and the double - dealing of a Western society that picks its moral fights with commodities in mind .
And when  Schindlers List  demanded that they never forget , one child , full of the pain of consciousness , remarked ,  We already forgot , otherwise how did Hotel Rwanda happen ? 
As they watch more films their lives got palpably richer .
 Pickpocket  started a debate about criminality disenfranchisement .
 To Sir , with Love  ignited its teen audience .
They celebrated a change in attitude towards non - white Britons , but railed against our restless school system that does not value collective identity , unlike that offered by Sidney Poitiers careful tutelage .
By now , these thoughtful , opinionated , curious young people thought nothing of tackling films of all forms  -  -  black and white , subtitled , documentary , non - narrative , fantasy  -  -  and thought nothing of writing detailed reviews that competed to favor one film over another in passionate and increasingly sophisticated prose .
Six thousand reviews each school week vying for the honor of being review of the week .
From 25 clubs , we became hundreds , then thousands , until we were nearly a quarter of a million kids in 7,000 clubs right across the country .
And although the numbers were , and continue to be , extraordinary , what became more extraordinary was how the experience of critical and curious questioning translated into life .
Some of our kids started talking with their parents , others with their teachers , or with their friends .
And those without friends started making them .
The films provided communality across all manner of divide .
And the stories they held provided a shared experience .
 Persepolis  brought a daughter closer to her Iranian mother , and  Jaws  became the way in which one young boy was able to articulate the fear hed experienced in flight from violence that killed first his father then his mother , the latter thrown overboard on a boat journey .
Who was right , who wrong ?
What would they do under the same conditions ?
Was the tale told well ?
Was there a hidden message ?
How has the world changed ? How could it be different ?
A tsunami of questions flew out of the mouths of children who the world didnt think were interested .
And they themselves had not known they cared .
And as they wrote and debated , rather than seeing the films as artifacts , they began to see themselves .
I have an aunt who is a wonderful storyteller .
In a moment she can invoke images of running barefoot on Table Mountain and playing cops and robbers .
Quite recently she told me that in 1948 , two of her sisters and my father traveled on a boat to Israel without my grandparents .
When the sailors mutinied at sea in a demand for humane conditions , it was these teenagers that fed the crew .
I was past 40 when my father died .
He never mentioned that journey .
My mothers mother left Europe in a hurry without her husband , but with her three - year - old daughter and diamonds sewn into the hem of her skirt .
After two years in hiding , my grandfather appeared in London .
He was never right again .
And his story was hushed as he assimilated .
My story started in England with a clean slate and the silence of immigrant parents .
I had  Anne Frank ,   The Great Escape ,   Shoah ,   Triumph of the Will . 
It was Leni Riefenstahl in her elegant Nazi propaganda who gave context to what the family had to endure .
These films held what was too hurtful to say out loud , and they became more useful to me than the whispers of survivors and the occasional glimpse of a tattoo on a maiden aunts wrist .
Purists may feel that fiction dissipates the quest of real human understanding , that film is too crude to tell a complex and detailed history , or that filmmakers always serve drama over truth .
But within the reels lie purpose and meaning .
As one 12 - year - old said after watching  Wizard of Oz ,   Every person should watch this , because unless you do you may not know that you too have a heart . 
We honor reading , why not honor watching with the same passion ?
Consider  Citizen Kane  as valuable as Jane Austen .
Agree that  Boyz n the Hood ,  like Tennyson , offers an emotional landscape and a heightened understanding that work together .
Each a piece of memorable art , each a brick in the wall of who we are .
And its okay if we remember Tom Hanks better than astronaut Jim Lovell or have Ben Kingsleys face superimposed onto that of Gandhis .
And though not real , Eve Harrington , Howard Beale , Mildred Pierce are an opportunity to discover what it is to be human , and no less helpful to understanding our life and times as Shakespeare is in illuminating the world of Elizabethan England .
We guessed that film , whose stories are a meeting place of drama , music , literature and human experience , would engage and inspire the young people participating in FILMCLUB .
What we could not have foreseen was the measurable improvements in behavior , confidence and academic achievement .
Once - reluctant students now race to school , talk to their teachers , fight , not on the playground , but to choose next weeks film  -  -  young people who have found self - definition , ambition and an appetite for education and social engagement from the stories they have witnessed .
Our members defy the binary description of how we so often describe our young .
They are neither feral nor myopically self - absorbed .
They are , like other young people , negotiating a world with infinite choice , but little culture of how to find meaningful experience .
We appeared surprised at the behaviors of those who define themselves by the size of the tick on their shoes , yet acquisition has been the narrative we have offered .
If we want different values we have to tell a different story , a story that understands that an individual narrative is an essential component of a persons identity , that a collective narrative is an essential component of a cultural identity , and without it it is impossible to imagine yourself as part of a group .
Because when these people get home after a screening of  Rear Window  and raise their gaze to the building next door , they have the tools to wonder who , apart from them , is out there and what is their story .
Thank you .
Ellen Jorgensen : Biohacking  -  -  you can do it , too
We have personal computing , why not personal biotech ? Thats the question biologist Ellen Jorgensen and her colleagues asked themselves before opening Genspace , a nonprofit DIYbio lab in Brooklyn devoted to citizen science , where amateurs can go and tinker with biotechnology . Far from being a sinister Frankensteins lab , Genspace offers a long list of fun , creative and practical uses for DIYbio .
Its a great time to be a molecular biologist .
Reading and writing DNA code is getting easier and cheaper .
By the end of this year , well be able to sequence the three million bits of information in your genome in less than a day and for less than 1,000 euros .
Biotech is probably the most powerful and the fastest - growing technology sector .
It has the power , potentially , to replace our fossil fuels , to revolutionize medicine , and to touch every aspect of our daily lives .
So who gets to do it ?
I think wed all be pretty comfortable with this guy doing it .
But what about that guy ?
In 2009 , I first heard about DIYbio .
Its a movement that  -  -  it advocates making biotechnology accessible to everyone , not just scientists and people in government labs .
The idea is that if you open up the science and you allow diverse groups to participate , it could really stimulate innovation .
Putting technology in the hands of the end user is usually a good idea because theyve got the best idea of what their needs are .
And heres this really sophisticated technology coming down the road , all these associated social , moral , ethical questions , and we scientists are just lousy at explaining to the public just exactly what it is were doing in those labs .
So wouldnt it be nice if there was a place in your local neighborhood where you could go and learn about this stuff , do it hands - on ?
I thought so .
So , three years ago , I got together with some friends of mine who had similar aspirations and we founded Genspace .
Its a nonprofit , a community biotech lab in Brooklyn , New York , and the idea was people could come , they could take classes and putter around in the lab in a very open , friendly atmosphere .
None of my previous experience prepared me for what came next . Can you guess ?
The press started calling us .
And the more we talked about how great it was to increase science literacy , the more they wanted to talk about us creating the next Frankenstein , and as a result , for the next six months , when you Googled my name , instead of getting my scientific papers , you got this .
  Am I a biohazard ?   It was pretty depressing .
The only thing that got us through that period was that we knew that all over the world , there were other people that were trying to do the same thing that we were .
They were opening biohacker spaces , and some of them were facing much greater challenges than we did , more regulations , less resources .
But now , three years later , heres where we stand .
Its a vibrant , global community of hackerspaces , and this is just the beginning .
These are some of the biggest ones , and there are others opening every day .
Theres one probably going to open up in Moscow , one in South Korea , and the cool thing is they each have their own individual flavor that grew out of the community they came out of .
Let me take you on a little tour .
Biohackers work alone .
We work in groups , in big cities — — and in small villages .
We reverse engineer lab equipment .
We genetically engineer bacteria .
We hack hardware , software , wetware , and , of course , the code of life .
We like to build things .
Then we like to take things apart .
We make things grow .
We make things glow .
And we make cells dance .
The spirit of these labs , its open , its positive , but , you know , sometimes when people think of us , the first thing that comes to mind is bio - safety , bio - security , all the dark side stuff .
Im not going to minimize those concerns .
Any powerful technology is inherently dual use , and , you know , you get something like synthetic biology , nanobiotechnology , it really compels you , you have to look at both the amateur groups but also the professional groups , because they have better infrastructure , they have better facilities , and they have access to pathogens .
So the United Nations did just that , and they recently issued a report on this whole area , and what they concluded was the power of this technology for positive was much greater than the risk for negative , and they even looked specifically at the DIYbio community , and they noted , not surprisingly , that the press had a tendency to consistently overestimate our capabilities and underestimate our ethics .
As a matter of fact , DIY people from all over the world , America , Europe , got together last year , and we hammered out a common code of ethics .
Thats a lot more than conventional science has done .
Now , we follow state and local regulations .
We dispose of our waste properly , we follow safety procedures , we dont work with pathogens .
You know , if youre working with a pathogen , youre not part of the biohacker community , youre part of the bioterrorist community , Im sorry .
And sometimes people ask me ,  Well , what about an accident ? 
Well , working with the safe organisms that we normally work with , the chance of an accident happening with somebody accidentally creating , like , some sort of superbug , thats literally about as probable as a snowstorm in the middle of the Sahara Desert .
Now , it could happen , but Im not going to plan my life around it .
Ive actually chosen to take a different kind of risk .
I signed up for something called the Personal Genome Project .
Its a study at Harvard where , at the end of the study , theyre going to take my entire genomic sequence , all of my medical information , and my identity , and theyre going to post it online for everyone to see .
There were a lot of risks involved that they talked about during the informed consent portion .
The one I liked the best is , someone could download my sequence , go back to the lab , synthesize some fake Ellen DNA , and plant it at a crime scene .
But like DIYbio , the positive outcomes and the potential for good for a study like that far outweighs the risk .
Now , you might be asking yourself ,  Well , you know , what would I do in a biolab ? 
Well , it wasnt that long ago we were asking ,  Well , what would anyone do with a personal computer ? 
So this stuff is just beginning .
Were only seeing just the tip of the DNA iceberg .
Let me show you what you could do right now .
A biohacker in Germany , a journalist , wanted to know whose dog was leaving little presents on his street ?
Yep , you guessed it . He threw tennis balls to all the neighborhood dogs , analyzed the saliva , identified the dog , and confronted the dog owner .
I discovered an invasive species in my own backyard .
Looked like a ladybug , right ?
It actually is a Japanese beetle .
And the same kind of technology  -  -  its called DNA barcoding , its really cool  -  -  You can use it to check if your caviar is really beluga , if that sushi is really tuna , or if that goat cheese that you paid so much for is really goats .
In a biohacker space , you can analyze your genome for mutations .
You can analyze your breakfast cereal for GMOs , and you can explore your ancestry .
You can send weather balloons up into the stratosphere , collect microbes , see whats up there .
You can make a biocensor out of yeast to detect pollutants in water .
You can make some sort of a biofuel cell .
You can do a lot of things .
You can also do an art science project . Some of these are really spectacular , and they look at social , ecological problems from a completely different perspective .
Its really cool .
Some people ask me , well , why am I involved ?
I could have a perfectly good career in mainstream science .
The thing is , theres something in these labs that they have to offer society that you cant find anywhere else .
Theres something sacred about a space where you can work on a project , and you dont have to justify to anyone that its going to make a lot of money , that its going to save mankind , or even that its feasible .
It just has to follow safety guidelines .
If you had spaces like this all over the world , it could really change the perception of whos allowed to do biotech .
Its spaces like these that spawned personal computing .
Why not personal biotech ?
If everyone in this room got involved , who knows what we could do ?
This is such a new area , and as we say back in Brooklyn , you aint seen nothin yet .
Geert Chatrou : A whistleblower you havent heard
In this engaging talk , world champion whistler Geert Chatrou performs the whimsical  Eleonora  by A . Honhoff , and his own  Fête de la Belle .  In a fascinating interlude , he talks about what brought him to the craft . 
Thank you very much .
That was whistling .
Im trying to do this in English .
What is a chubby , curly - haired guy from Holland  -  -  why is he whistling ?
Well actually , Ive  been  whistling since the age of four , about four .
My dad was always whistling around the house , and I just thought thats part of communication in my family .
So I whistled along with him .
And actually , till I was 34 , I always annoyed and irritated people with whistling , because , to be honest , my whistling is a kind of deviant behavior .
I whistled alone . I whistled in the classroom .
I whistled on  my  bike . I whistled everywhere .
And I also whistled at a Christmas Eve party with my family - in - law .
And they had some , in my opinion , terrible Christmas music .
And when I hear music that I dont like , I try to make it better .
So  Rudolph the Red - Nosed Reindeer   -  -  you know it ?
But it can also sound like this .
But during a Christmas party  -  -  at dinner actually  -  -  its very annoying .
So my sister - in - law asked me a few times ,  Please stop whistling . 
And I just couldnt .
And at one point  -  -  and I had some wine , I have to admit that  -  -  at one point I said ,  If there was a contest , I would join . 
And two weeks later I received a text message :  Youre going to America . 
So , okay , Im going to America .
I would love to , but why ?
So I immediately called her up , of course .
She Googled , and she found this World Whistling Championship in America , of course .
She didnt expect me to go there .
And I would have lost my face .
I dont know if thats correct English .
But the Dutch people here will understand what I mean .
I lost my face .
And she thought ,  He will never go there . 
But actually I did .
So I went to Louisburg , North Carolina , southeast United States , and I entered the world of whistling .
And I also entered the world championship , and I won there in 2004 .
That was great fun , of course .
And to defend my title  -  -  like judokas do and sportsmen  -  -  I thought , well lets go back in 2005 , and I won again .
Then I couldnt participate for a few years .
And in 2008 I entered again in Japan , Tokyo , and I won again .
So what happened now is Im standing here in Rotterdam , in the beautiful city , on a big stage , and Im talking about whistling .
And actually I earn my money whistling at the moment .
So I quit my day job as a nurse .
And I try to live my dream  -  -  well , actually , it was never my dream , but it sounds so good .
Okay , Im not the only one whistling here .
You say ,  Huh , what do you mean ? 
Well actually , you are going to whistle along .
And then always the same thing happens : people are watching each other and think ,  Oh , my God .
Why ? Can I go away ? 
No , you cant .
Actually its very simple .
The track that I will whistle is called  Fête de la Belle . 
Its about 80 minutes long .
No , no , no . Its four minutes long .
And I want to first rehearse with you your whistling .
So I whistle the tone .
Sorry . I forgot one thing .
You whistle the same tone as me .
I heard a wide variety of tones .
This is very promising .
This is very promising .
Ill ask the technicians to start the music .
And if its started , I just point where you whistle along , and we will see what happens .
Oh , hah .
Im so sorry , technicians .
Im so used to that .
I start it myself .
Okay , here it is .
Okay .
Its easy , isnt it ?
Now comes the solo . I propose I do that myself .
Max Westerman : Geert Chatrou , the World Champion  of  Whistling .
Geert Chatrou : Thank you . Thank you .
Roberto DAngelo + Francesca Fedeli : In our babys illness , a life lesson
Roberto DAngelo and Francesca Fedeli thought their baby boy Mario was healthy  -  -  until at 10 days old , they discovered hed had a perinatal stroke . With Mario unable to control the left side of his body , they grappled with tough questions : Would he be  normal ?  Could he live a full life ? The poignant story of parents facing their fears  -  -  and how they turned them around .
Francesca Fedeli : Ciao .
So hes Mario . Hes our son .
He was born two and a half years ago , and I had a pretty tough pregnancy because I had to stay still in a bed for , like , eight months .
But in the end everything seemed to be under control .
So he got the right weight at birth .
He got the right Apgar index .
So we were pretty reassured by this .
But at the end , 10 days later after he was born , we discovered that he had a stroke .
As you might know , a stroke is a brain injury .
A perinatal stroke could be something that can happen during the nine months of pregnancy or just suddenly after the birth , and in his case , as you can see , the right part of his brain has gone .
So the effect that this stroke could have on Marios body could be the fact that he couldnt be able to control the left side of his body .
Just imagine , if you have a computer and a printer and you want to transmit , to input to print out a document , but the printer doesnt have the right drives , so the same is for Mario .
Its just like , he would like to move his left side of his body , but hes not able to transmit the right input to move his left arm and left leg .
So life had to change .
We needed to change our schedule .
We needed to change the impact that this birth had on our life .
As you may imagine , unfortunately , we were not ready .
Nobody taught us how to deal with such kinds of disabilities , and as many questions as possible started to come to our minds .
And that has been really a tough time .
Questions , some basics , like , you know , why did this happen to us ?
And what went wrong ?
Some more tough , like , really , what will be the impact on Marios life ?
I mean , at the end , will he be able to work ?
Will he be able to be normal ?
And , you know , as a parent , especially for the first time , why is he not going to be better than us ?
And this , indeed , really is tough to say , but a few months later , we realized that we were really feeling like a failure .
I mean , the only real product of our life , at the end , was a failure .
And you know , it was not a failure for ourselves in itself , but it was a failure that will impact his full life .
Honestly , we went down .
I mean we went really down , but at the end , we started to look at him , and we said , we have to react .
So immediately , as Francesca said , we changed our life .
We started physiotherapy , we started the rehabilitation , and one of the paths that we were following in terms of rehabilitation is the mirror neurons pilot .
Basically , we spent months doing this with Mario .
You have an object , and we showed him how to grab the object .
Now , the theory of mirror neurons simply says that in your brains , exactly now , as you watch me doing this , you are activating exactly the same neurons as if you do the actions .
It looks like this is the leading edge in terms of rehabilitation .
But one day we found that Mario was not looking at our hand .
He was looking at us .
We were his mirror .
And the problem , as you might feel , is that we were down , we were depressed , we were looking at him as a problem , not as a son , not from a positive perspective .
And that day really changed our perspective .
We realized that we had to become a better mirror for Mario .
We restarted from our strengths , and at the same time we restarted from his strengths .
We stopped looking at him as a problem , and we started to look at him as an opportunity to improve .
And really , this was the change , and from our side , we said ,  What are our strengths that we really can bring to Mario ? 
And we started from our passions .
I mean , at the end , my wife and myself are quite different , but we have many things in common .
We love to travel , we love music , we love to be in places like this , and we started to bring Mario with us just to show to him the best things that we can show to him .
This short video is from last week .
I am not saying  -  -  — I am not saying its a miracle . Thats not the message , because we are just at the beginning of the path .
But we want to share what was the key learning , the key learning that Mario drove to us , and it is to consider what you have as a gift and not only what you miss , and to consider what you miss just as an opportunity .
And this is the message that we want to share with you .
This is why we are here .
Mario !
And this is why  -  -  — And this is why we decided to share the best mirror in the world with him .
And we thank you so much , all of you .
Thank you . Thank you . Bye .
Thank you .
Mark Shaw : One very dry demo
Mark Shaw demos Ultra - Ever Dry , a liquid - repellent coating that acts as an astonishingly powerful shield against water and water - based materials . At the nano level , the spray covers a surface with an umbrella of air so that water bounces right off . Watch for an exciting two - minute kicker .
Im here to show you how something you cant see can be so much fun to look at .
Youre about to experience a new , available and exciting technology thats going to make us rethink how we waterproof our lives .
What I have here is a cinder block that weve coated half with a nanotechnology spray that can be applied to almost any material .
Its called Ultra - Ever Dry , and when you apply it to any material , it turns into a superhydrophobic shield .
So this is a cinder block , uncoated , and you can see that its porous , it absorbs water .
Not anymore .
Porous , nonporous .
So whats superhydrophobic ?
Superhydrophobic is how we measure a drop of water on a surface .
The rounder it is , the more hydrophobic it is , and if its really round , its superhydrophobic .
A freshly waxed car , the water molecules slump to about 90 degrees .
A windshield coating is going to give you about 110 degrees .
But what youre seeing here is 160 to 175 degrees , and anything over 150 is superhydrophobic .
So as part of the demonstration , what I have is a pair of gloves , and weve coated one of the gloves with the nanotechnology coating , and lets see if you can tell which one , and Ill give you a hint .
Did you guess the one that was dry ?
When you have nanotechnology and nanoscience , whats occurred is that were able to now look at atoms and molecules and actually control them for great benefits .
And were talking really small here .
The way you measure nanotechnology is in nanometers , and one nanometer is a billionth of a meter , and to put some scale to that , if you had a nanoparticle that was one nanometer thick , and you put it side by side , and you had 50,000 of them , youd be the width of a human hair .
So very small , but very useful .
And its not just water that this works with .
Its a lot of water - based materials like concrete , water - based paint , mud , and also some refined oils as well .
You can see the difference .
Moving onto the next demonstration , weve taken a pane of glass and weve coated the outside of it , weve framed it with the nanotechnology coating , and were going to pour this green - tinted water inside the middle , and youre going to see , its going to spread out on glass like youd normally think it would , except when it hits the coating , it stops , and I cant even coax it to leave .
Its that afraid of the water .
So whats going on here ? Whats happening ?
Well , the surface of the spray coating is actually filled with nanoparticles that form a very rough and craggly surface .
Youd think itd be smooth , but its actually not .
And it has billions of interstitial spaces , and those spaces , along with the nanoparticles , reach up and grab the air molecules , and cover the surface with air .
Its an umbrella of air all across it , and that layer of air is what the water hits , the mud hits , the concrete hits , and it glides right off .
So if I put this inside this water here , you can see a silver reflective coating around it , and that silver reflective coating is the layer of air thats protecting the water from touching the paddle , and its dry .
So what are the applications ?
I mean , many of you right now are probably going through your head .
Everyone that sees this gets excited , and says ,  Oh , I could use it for this and this and this . 
The applications in a general sense could be anything thats anti - wetting .
Weve certainly seen that today .
It could be anything thats anti - icing , because if you dont have water , you dont have ice .
It could be anti - corrosion .
No water , no corrosion .
It could be anti - bacterial .
Without water , the bacteria wont survive .
And it could be things that need to be self - cleaning as well .
So imagine how something like this could help revolutionize your field of work .
And Im going to leave you with one last demonstration , but before I do that , I would like to say thank you , and think small .
Its going to happen . Wait for it . Wait for it .
You guys didnt hear about us cutting out the Design from TED ?
 Two minutes later ...  He ran into all sorts of problems in terms of managing the medical research part .
Its happening !
Dan Ariely : Our buggy moral code
Behavioral economist Dan Ariely studies the bugs in our moral code : the hidden reasons we think its OK to cheat or steal . Clever studies help make his point that were predictably irrational  -  -  and can be influenced in ways we cant grasp .
I want to talk to you today a little bit about predictable irrationality .
And my interest in irrational behavior started many years ago in the hospital .
I was burned very badly .
And if you spend a lot of time in hospital , youll see a lot of types of irrationalities .
And the one that particularly bothered me in the burn department was the process by which the nurses took the bandage off me .
Now , you must have all taken a Band - Aid off at some point , and you must have wondered whats the right approach .
Do you rip it off quickly  -  -  short duration but high intensity  -  -  or do you take your Band - Aid off slowly  -  -  you take a long time , but each second is not as painful  -  -  which one of those is the right approach ?
The nurses in my department thought that the right approach was the ripping one , so they would grab hold and they would rip , and they would grab hold and they would rip .
And because I had 70 percent of my body burned , it would take about an hour .
And as you can imagine , I hated that moment of ripping with incredible intensity .
And I would try to reason with them and say ,  Why dont we try something else ?
Why dont we take it a little longer  -  -  maybe two hours instead of an hour  -  -  and have less of this intensity ? 
And the nurses told me two things .
They told me that they had the right model of the patient  -  -  that they knew what was the right thing to do to minimize my pain  -  -  and they also told me that the word patient doesnt mean to make suggestions or to interfere or ...
This is not just in Hebrew , by the way .
Its in every language Ive had experience with so far .
And , you know , theres not much  -  -  there wasnt much I could do , and they kept on doing what they were doing .
And about three years later , when I left the hospital , I started studying at the university .
And one of the most interesting lessons I learned was that there is an experimental method that if you have a question you can create a replica of this question in some abstract way , and you can try to examine this question , maybe learn something about the world .
So thats what I did .
I was still interested in this question of how do you take bandages off burn patients .
So originally I didnt have much money , so I went to a hardware store and I bought a carpenters vice .
And I would bring people to the lab and I would put their finger in it , and I would crunch it a little bit .
And I would crunch it for long periods and short periods , and pain that went up and pain that went down , and with breaks and without breaks  -  -  all kinds of versions of pain .
And when I finished hurting people a little bit , I would ask them , so , how painful was this ? Or , how painful was this ?
Or , if you had to choose between the last two , which one would you choose ?
I kept on doing this for a while .
And then , like all good academic projects , I got more funding .
I moved to sounds , electrical shocks  -  -  I even had a pain suit that I could get people to feel much more pain .
But at the end of this process , what I learned was that the nurses were wrong .
Here were wonderful people with good intentions and plenty of experience , and nevertheless they were getting things wrong predictably all the time .
It turns out that because we dont encode duration in the way that we encode intensity , I would have had less pain if the duration would have been longer and the intensity was lower .
It turns out it would have been better to start with my face , which was much more painful , and move toward my legs , giving me a trend of improvement over time  -  -  that would have been also less painful .
And it also turns out that it would have been good to give me breaks in the middle to kind of recuperate from the pain .
All of these would have been great things to do , and my nurses had no idea .
And from that point on I started thinking , are the nurses the only people in the world who get things wrong in this particular decision , or is it a more general case ?
And it turns out its a more general case  -  -  theres a lot of mistakes we do .
And I want to give you one example of one of these irrationalities , and I want to talk to you about cheating .
And the reason I picked cheating is because its interesting , but also it tells us something , I think , about the stock market situation were in .
So , my interest in cheating started when Enron came on the scene , exploded all of a sudden , and I started thinking about what is happening here .
Is it the case that there was kind of a few apples who are capable of doing these things , or are we talking a more endemic situation , that many people are actually capable of behaving this way ?
So , like we usually do , I decided to do a simple experiment .
And heres how it went .
If you were in the experiment , I would pass you a sheet of paper with 20 simple math problems that everybody could solve , but I wouldnt give you enough time .
When the five minutes were over , I would say ,  Pass me the sheets of paper , and Ill pay you a dollar per question . 
People did this . I would pay people four dollars for their task  -  -  on average people would solve four problems .
Other people I would tempt to cheat .
I would pass their sheet of paper .
When the five minutes were over , I would say ,  Please shred the piece of paper .
Put the little pieces in your pocket or in your backpack , and tell me how many questions you got correctly . 
People now solved seven questions on average .
Now , it wasnt as if there was a few bad apples  -  -  a few people cheated a lot .
Instead , what we saw is a lot of people who cheat a little bit .
Now , in economic theory , cheating is a very simple cost - benefit analysis .
You say , whats the probability of being caught ?
How much do I stand to gain from cheating ?
And how much punishment would I get if I get caught ?
And you weigh these options out  -  -  you do the simple cost - benefit analysis , and you decide whether its worthwhile to commit the crime or not .
So , we try to test this .
For some people , we varied how much money they could get away with  -  -  how much money they could steal .
We paid them 10 cents per correct question , 50 cents , a dollar , five dollars , 10 dollars per correct question .
You would expect that as the amount of money on the table increases , people would cheat more , but in fact it wasnt the case .
We got a lot of people cheating by stealing by a little bit .
What about the probability of being caught ?
Some people shredded half the sheet of paper , so there was some evidence left .
Some people shredded the whole sheet of paper .
Some people shredded everything , went out of the room , and paid themselves from the bowl of money that had over 100 dollars .
You would expect that as the probability of being caught goes down , people would cheat more , but again , this was not the case .
Again , a lot of people cheated by just by a little bit , and they were insensitive to these economic incentives .
So we said ,  If people are not sensitive to the economic rational theory explanations , to these forces , what could be going on ? 
And we thought maybe what is happening is that there are two forces .
At one hand , we all want to look at ourselves in the mirror and feel good about ourselves , so we dont want to cheat .
On the other hand , we can cheat a little bit , and still feel good about ourselves .
So , maybe what is happening is that theres a level of cheating we cant go over , but we can still benefit from cheating at a low degree , as long as it doesnt change our impressions about ourselves .
We call this like a personal fudge factor .
Now , how would you test a personal fudge factor ?
Initially we said , what can we do to shrink the fudge factor ?
So , we got people to the lab , and we said ,  We have two tasks for you today . 
First , we asked half the people to recall either 10 books they read in high school , or to recall The Ten Commandments , and then we tempted them with cheating .
Turns out the people who tried to recall The Ten Commandments  -  -  and in our sample nobody could recall all of The Ten Commandments  -  -  but those people who tried to recall The Ten Commandments , given the opportunity to cheat , did not cheat at all .
It wasnt that the more religious people  -  -  the people who remembered more of the Commandments  -  -  cheated less , and the less religious people  -  -  the people who couldnt remember almost any Commandments  -  -  cheated more .
The moment people thought about trying to recall The Ten Commandments , they stopped cheating .
In fact , even when we gave self - declared atheists the task of swearing on the Bible and we give them a chance to cheat , they dont cheat at all .
Now , Ten Commandments is something that is hard to bring into the education system , so we said ,  Why dont we get people to sign the honor code ? 
So , we got people to sign ,  I understand that this short survey falls under the MIT Honor Code . 
Then they shredded it . No cheating whatsoever .
And this is particularly interesting , because MIT doesnt have an honor code .
So , all this was about decreasing the fudge factor .
What about increasing the fudge factor ?
The first experiment  -  -  I walked around MIT and I distributed six - packs of Cokes in the refrigerators  -  -  these were common refrigerators for the undergrads .
And I came back to measure what we technically call the half - lifetime of Coke  -  -  how long does it last in the refrigerators ?
As you can expect it doesnt last very long ; people take it .
In contrast , I took a plate with six one - dollar bills , and I left those plates in the same refrigerators .
No bill ever disappeared .
Now , this is not a good social science experiment , so to do it better I did the same experiment as I described to you before .
A third of the people we passed the sheet , they gave it back to us .
A third of the people we passed it to , they shredded it , they came to us and said ,  Mr. Experimenter , I solved X problems . Give me X dollars . 
A third of the people , when they finished shredding the piece of paper , they came to us and said ,  Mr Experimenter , I solved X problems . Give me X tokens . 
We did not pay them with dollars ; we paid them with something else .
And then they took the something else , they walked 12 feet to the side , and exchanged it for dollars .
Think about the following intuition .
How bad would you feel about taking a pencil from work home , compared to how bad would you feel about taking 10 cents from a petty cash box ?
These things feel very differently .
Would being a step removed from cash for a few seconds by being paid by token make a difference ?
Our subjects doubled their cheating .
Ill tell you what I think about this and the stock market in a minute .
But this did not solve the big problem I had with Enron yet , because in Enron , theres also a social element .
People see each other behaving .
In fact , every day when we open the news we see examples of people cheating .
What does this cause us ?
So , we did another experiment .
We got a big group of students to be in the experiment , and we prepaid them .
So everybody got an envelope with all the money for the experiment , and we told them that at the end , we asked them to pay us back the money they didnt make . OK ?
The same thing happens .
When we give people the opportunity to cheat , they cheat .
They cheat just by a little bit , all the same .
But in this experiment we also hired an acting student .
This acting student stood up after 30 seconds , and said ,  I solved everything . What do I do now ? 
And the experimenter said ,  If youve finished everything , go home .
Thats it . The task is finished . 
So , now we had a student  -  -  an acting student  -  -  that was a part of the group .
Nobody knew it was an actor .
And they clearly cheated in a very , very serious way .
What would happen to the other people in the group ?
Will they cheat more , or will they cheat less ?
Here is what happens .
It turns out it depends on what kind of sweatshirt theyre wearing .
Here is the thing .
We ran this at Carnegie Mellon and Pittsburgh .
And at Pittsburgh there are two big universities , Carnegie Mellon and University of Pittsburgh .
All of the subjects sitting in the experiment were Carnegie Mellon students .
When the actor who was getting up was a Carnegie Mellon student  -  -  he was actually a Carnegie Mellon student  -  -  but he was a part of their group , cheating went up .
But when he actually had a University of Pittsburgh sweatshirt , cheating went down .
Now , this is important , because remember , when the moment the student stood up , it made it clear to everybody that they could get away with cheating , because the experimenter said ,  Youve finished everything . Go home ,  and they went with the money .
So it wasnt so much about the probability of being caught again .
It was about the norms for cheating .
If somebody from our in - group cheats and we see them cheating , we feel its more appropriate , as a group , to behave this way .
But if its somebody from another group , these terrible people  -  -  I mean , not terrible in this  -  -  but somebody we dont want to associate ourselves with , from another university , another group , all of a sudden peoples awareness of honesty goes up  -  -  a little bit like The Ten Commandments experiment  -  -  and people cheat even less .
So , what have we learned from this about cheating ?
Weve learned that a lot of people can cheat .
They cheat just by a little bit .
When we remind people about their morality , they cheat less .
When we get bigger distance from cheating , from the object of money , for example , people cheat more .
And when we see cheating around us , particularly if its a part of our in - group , cheating goes up .
Now , if we think about this in terms of the stock market , think about what happens .
What happens in a situation when you create something where you pay people a lot of money to see reality in a slightly distorted way ?
Would they not be able to see it this way ?
Of course they would .
What happens when you do other things , like you remove things from money ?
You call them stock , or stock options , derivatives , mortgage - backed securities .
Could it be that with those more distant things , its not a token for one second , its something that is many steps removed from money for a much longer time  -  -  could it be that people will cheat even more ?
And what happens to the social environment when people see other people behave around them ?
I think all of those forces worked in a very bad way in the stock market .
More generally , I want to tell you something about behavioral economics .
We have many intuitions in our life , and the point is that many of these intuitions are wrong .
The question is , are we going to test those intuitions ?
We can think about how were going to test this intuition in our private life , in our business life , and most particularly when it goes to policy , when we think about things like No Child Left Behind , when you create new stock markets , when you create other policies  -  -  taxation , health care and so on .
And the difficulty of testing our intuition was the big lesson I learned when I went back to the nurses to talk to them .
So I went back to talk to them and tell them what I found out about removing bandages .
And I learned two interesting things .
One was that my favorite nurse , Ettie , told me that I did not take her pain into consideration .
She said ,  Of course , you know , it was very painful for you .
But think about me as a nurse , taking , removing the bandages of somebody I liked , and had to do it repeatedly over a long period of time .
Creating so much torture was not something that was good for me , too . 
And she said maybe part of the reason was it was difficult for her .
But it was actually more interesting than that , because she said ,  I did not think that your intuition was right .
I felt my intuition was correct . 
So , if you think about all of your intuitions , its very hard to believe that your intuition is wrong .
And she said ,  Given the fact that I thought my intuition was right ...   -  -  she thought her intuition was right  -  -  it was very difficult for her to accept doing a difficult experiment to try and check whether she was wrong .
But in fact , this is the situation were all in all the time .
We have very strong intuitions about all kinds of things  -  -  our own ability , how the economy works , how we should pay school teachers .
But unless we start testing those intuitions , were not going to do better .
And just think about how better my life would have been if these nurses would have been willing to check their intuition , and how everything would have been better if we just start doing more systematic experimentation of our intuitions .
Thank you very much .
Jane McGonigal : Massively multi - player … thumb - wrestling ?
What happens when you get an entire audience to stand up and connect with one another ? Chaos , thats what . At least , thats what happened when Jane McGonigal tried to teach TED to play her favorite game . Then again , when the game is  massively multiplayer thumb - wrestling ,  what else would you expect ?
Today I am going to teach you how to play my favorite game : massively multiplayer thumb - wrestling .
Its the only game in the world that I know of that allows you , the player , the opportunity to experience 10 positive emotions in 60 seconds or less .
This is true , so if you play this game with me today for just one single minute , you will get to feel joy , relief , love , surprise , pride , curiosity , excitement , awe and wonder , contentment , and creativity , all in the span of one minute .
So this sounds pretty good , right ? Now youre willing to play .
In order to teach you this game , Im going to need some volunteers to come up onstage really quickly , and were going to do a little hands - on demo .
While theyre coming up , I should let you know , this game was invented 10 years ago by an artists collective in Austria named Monochrom .
So thank you , Monochrom .
Okay , so most people are familiar with traditional , two - person thumb - wrestling .
Sunni , lets just remind them .
One , two , three , four , I declare a thumb war , and we wrestle , and of course Sunni beats me because shes the best .
Now the first thing about massively multiplayer thumb - wrestling , were the gamer generation .
There are a billion gamers on the planet now , so we need more of a challenge .
So the first thing we need is more thumbs .
So Eric , come on over .
So we could get three thumbs together , and Peter could join us .
We could even have four thumbs together , and the way you win is youre the first person to pin someone elses thumb .
This is really important . You cant , like , wait while they fight it out and then swoop in at the last minute .
That is not how you win .
Ah , who did that ? Eric you did that .
So Eric would have won . He was the first person to pin my thumb .
Okay , so thats the first rule , and we can see that three or four is kind of the typical number of thumbs in a node , but if you feel ambitious , you dont have to hold back .
We can really go for it .
So you can see up here .
Now the only other rule you need to remember is , gamer generation , we like a challenge .
I happen to notice you all have some thumbs youre not using .
So I think we should kind of get some more involved .
And if we had just four people , we would do it just like this , and we would try and wrestle both thumbs at the same time .
Perfect .
Now , if we had more people in the room , instead of just wrestling in a closed node , we might reach out and try and grab some other people .
And in fact , thats what were going to do right now .
Were going to try and get all , something like , I dont know , 1,500 thumbs in this room connected in a single node .
And we have to connect both levels , so if youre up there , youre going to be reaching down and reaching up .
Now — — before we get started  -  -  This is great . Youre excited to play . — before we get started , can I have the slides back up here really quick , because if you get good at this game , I want you to know there are some advanced levels .
So this is the kind of simple level , right ?
But there are advanced configurations .
This is called the Death Star Configuration .
Any Star Wars fans ?
And this ones called the Möbius Strip .
Any science geeks , you get that one .
This is the hardest level . This is the extreme .
So well stick with the normal one for now , and Im going to give you 30 seconds , every thumb into the node , connect the upper and the lower levels , you guys go on down there .
Thirty seconds . Into the network . Make the node .
Stand up ! Its easier if you stand up .
Everybody , up up up up up !
Stand up , my friends .
All right .
Dont start wrestling yet .
If you have a free thumb , wave it around , make sure it gets connected .
Okay . We need to do a last - minute thumb check .
If you have a free thumb , wave it around to make sure .
Grab that thumb !
Reach behind you . There you go .
Any other thumbs ?
Okay , on the count of three , youre going to go .
Try to keep track . Grab , grab , grab it .
Okay ? One , two , three , go !
Did you win ? You got it ? You got it ? Excellent !
Well done . Thank you . Thank you very much .
All right .
While you are basking in the glow of having won your first massively multiplayer thumb - wrestling game , lets do a quick recap on the positive emotions .
So curiosity .
I said  massively multiplayer thumb - wrestling . 
You were like ,  What the hell is she talking about ? 
So I provoked a little curiosity .
Creativity : it took creativity to solve the problem of getting all the thumbs into the node .
Im reaching around and Im reaching up .
So you used creativity . That was great .
How about surprise ? The actual feeling of trying to wrestle two thumbs at once is pretty surprising .
You heard that sound go up in the room .
We had excitement . As you started to wrestle , maybe youre starting to win or this persons , like , really into it , so you kind of get the excitement going .
We have relief . You got to stand up .
Youve been sitting for awhile , so the physical relief , getting to shake it out .
We had joy . You were laughing , smiling . Look at your faces . This room is full of joy .
We had some contentment .
I didnt see anybody sending text messages or checking their email while we were playing , so you were totally content to be playing .
The most important three emotions , awe and wonder , we had everybody connected physically for a minute .
When was the last time you were at TED and you got to connect physically with every single person in the room ?
And its truly awesome and wondrous .
And speaking of physical connection , you guys know I love the hormone oxytocin , you release oxytocin , you feel bonded to everyone in the room .
You guys know that the best way to release oxytocin quickly is to hold someone elses hand for at least six seconds .
You guys were all holding hands for way more than six seconds , so we are all now biochemically primed to love each other . That is great .
And the last emotion of pride .
How many people are like me . Just admit it .
You lost both your thumbs .
It just didnt work out for you .
Thats okay , because you learned a new skill today .
You learned , from scratch , a game you never knew before .
Now you know how to play it . You can teach other people .
So congratulations .
How many of you won just won thumb ?
All right . I have very good news for you .
According to the official rules of massively multiplayer thumb - wrestling , this makes you a grandmaster of the game .
Because there arent that many people who know how to play , we have to kind of accelerate the program more than a game like chess .
So congratulations , grandmasters .
Win one thumb once , you will become a grandmaster .
Did anybody win both their thumbs ?
Yes . Awesome . Okay .
Get ready to update your Twitter or Facebook status .
You guys , according to the rules , are legendary grandmasters , so congratulations .
I will just leave you with this tip , if you want to play again .
The best way to become a legendary grandmaster , youve got your two nodes going on .
Pick off the one that looks easiest .
Theyre not paying attention . They look kind of weak .
Focus on that one and do something crazy with this arm .
As soon as you win , suddenly stop .
Everybody is thrown off . You go in for the kill .
Thats how you become a legendary grandmaster of massively multiplayer thumb - wrestling .
Thank you for letting me teach you my favorite game .
Wooo !
Thank you .
David Byrne : How architecture helped music evolve
As his career grew , David Byrne went from playing CBGB to Carnegie Hall . He asks : Does the venue make the music ? From outdoor drumming to Wagnerian operas to arena rock , he explores how context has pushed musical innovation .
This is the venue where , as a young man , some of the music that I wrote was first performed .
It was , remarkably , a pretty good sounding room .
With all the uneven walls and all the crap everywhere , it actually sounded pretty good .
This is a song that was recorded there .
This is not Talking Heads , in the picture anyway .
 by Talking Heads ) So the nature of the room meant that words could be understood .
The lyrics of the songs could be pretty much understood .
The sound system was kind of decent .
And there wasnt a lot of reverberation in the room .
So the rhythms could be pretty intact too , pretty concise .
Other places around the country had similar rooms .
This is Tootsies Orchid Lounge in Nashville .
The music was in some ways different , but in structure and form , very much the same .
The clientele behavior was very much the same too .
And so the bands at Tootsies or at CBGBs had to play loud enough  -  -  the volume had to be loud enough to overcome people falling down , shouting out and doing whatever else they were doing .
Since then , Ive played other places that are much nicer .
Ive played the Disney Hall here and Carnegie Hall and places like that .
And its been very exciting .
But I also noticed that sometimes the music that I had written , or was writing at the time , didnt sound all that great in some of those halls .
We managed , but sometimes those halls didnt seem exactly suited to the music I was making or had made .
So I asked myself : Do I write stuff for specific rooms ?
Do I have a place , a venue , in mind when I write ?
Is that a kind of model for creativity ?
Do we all make things with a venue , a context , in mind ?
Okay , Africa .
Most of the popular music that we know now has a big part of its roots in West Africa .
And the music there , I would say , the instruments , the intricate rhythms , the way its played , the setting , the context , its all perfect . It all works perfect .
The music works perfectly in that setting .
Theres no big room to create reverberation and confuse the rhythms .
The instruments are loud enough that they can be heard without amplification , etc . , etc .
Its no accident .
Its perfect for that particular context .
And it would be a mess in a context like this . This is a gothic cathedral .
In a gothic cathedral , this kind of music is perfect .
It doesnt change key , the notes are long , theres almost no rhythm whatsoever , and the room flatters the music .
It actually improves it .
This is the room that Bach wrote some of his music for . This is the organ .
Its not as big as a gothic cathedral , so he can write things that are a little bit more intricate .
He can , very innovatively , actually change keys without risking huge dissonances .
This is a little bit later .
This is the kind of rooms that Mozart wrote in .
I think were in like 1770 , somewhere around there .
Theyre smaller , even less reverberant , so he can write really frilly music thats very intricate  -  -  and it works .
It fits the room perfectly .
This is La Scala .
Its around the same time , I think it was built around 1776 .
People in the audience in these opera houses , when they were built , they used to yell out to one another .
They used to eat , drink and yell out to people on the stage , just like they do at CBGBs and places like that .
If they liked an aria , they would holler and suggest that it be done again as an encore , not at the end of the show , but immediately .
And well , that was an opera experience .
This is the opera house that Wagner built for himself .
And the size of the room is not that big .
Its smaller than this .
But Wagner made an innovation .
He wanted a bigger band .
He wanted a little more bombast , so he increased the size of the orchestra pit so he could get more low - end instruments in there .
Okay .
This is Carnegie Hall .
Obviously , this kind of thing became popular .
The halls got bigger . Carnegie Halls fair - sized .
Its larger than some of the other symphony halls .
And theyre a lot more reverberant than La Scala .
Around the same , according to Alex Ross who writes for the New Yorker , this kind of rule came into effect that audiences had to be quiet  -  -  no more eating , drinking and yelling at the stage , or gossiping with one another during the show .
They had to be very quiet .
So those two things combined meant that a different kind of music worked best in these kind of halls .
It meant that there could be extreme dynamics , which there werent in some of these other kinds of music .
Quiet parts could be heard that would have been drowned out by all the gossiping and shouting .
But because of the reverberation in those rooms like Carnegie Hall , the music had to be maybe a little less rhythmic and a little more textural .
This is Mahler .
It looks like Bob Dylan , but its Mahler .
That was Bobs last record , yeah .
Popular music , coming along at the same time .
This is a jazz band .
According to Scott Joplin , the bands were playing on riverboats and clubs .
Again , its noisy . Theyre playing for dancers .
Theres certain sections of the song  -  -  the songs had different sections that the dancers really liked .
And theyd say ,  Play that part again . 
Well , theres only so many times you can play the same section of a song over and over again for the dancers .
So the bands started to improvise new melodies .
And a new form of music was born .
These are played mainly in small rooms .
People are dancing , shouting and drinking .
So the music has to be loud enough to be heard above that .
Same thing goes true for  -  -  thats the beginning of the century  -  -  for the whole of 20th - century popular music , whether its rock or Latin music or whatever .
 Live music  doesnt really change that much .
It changes about a third of the way into the 20th century , when this became one of the primary venues for music .
And this was one way that the music got there .
Microphones enabled singers , in particular , and musicians and composers , to completely change the kind of music that they were writing .
So far , a lot of the stuff that was on the radio was live music , but singers , like Frank Sinatra , could use the mic and do things that they could never do without a microphone .
Other singers after him went even further .
This is Chet Baker .
And this kind of thing would have been impossible without a microphone .
It would have been impossible without recorded music as well .
And hes singing right into your ear .
Hes whispering into your ears .
The effect is just electric .
Its like the guy is sitting next to you , whispering who knows what into your ear .
So at this point , music diverged .
Theres live music , and theres recorded music .
And they no longer have to be exactly the same .
Now theres venues like this , a discotheque , and theres jukeboxes in bars , where you dont even need to have a band .
There doesnt need to be any live performing musicians whatsoever , and the sound systems are good .
People began to make music specifically for discos and for those sound systems .
And , as with jazz , the dancers liked certain sections more than they did others .
So the early hip - hop guys would loop certain sections .
The MC would improvise lyrics in the same way that the jazz players would improvise melodies .
And another new form of music was born .
Live performance , when it was incredibly successful , ended up in what is probably , acoustically , the worst sounding venues on the planet : sports stadiums , basketball arenas and hockey arenas .
Musicians who ended up there did the best they could .
They wrote what is now called arena rock , which is medium - speed ballads .
They did the best they could given that this is what theyre writing for .
The tempos are medium . It sounds big .
Its more a social situation than a musical situation .
And in some ways , the music that theyre writing for this place works perfectly .
So theres more new venues .
One of the new ones is the automobile .
I grew up with a radio in a car .
But now thats evolved into something else .
The car is a whole venue .
The music that , I would say , is written for automobile sound systems works perfectly on it .
It might not be what you want to listen to at home , but it works great in the car  -  -  has a huge frequency spectrum , you know , big bass and high - end and the voice kind of stuck in the middle .
Automobile music , you can share with your friends .
Theres one other kind of new venue , the private MP3 player .
Presumably , this is just for Christian music .
And in some ways its like Carnegie Hall , or when the audience had to hush up , because you can now hear every single detail .
In other ways , its more like the West African music because if the music in an MP3 player gets too quiet , you turn it up , and the next minute , your ears are blasted out by a louder passage .
So that doesnt really work .
I think pop music , mainly , its written today , to some extent , is written for these kind of players , for this kind of personal experience where you can hear extreme detail , but the dynamic doesnt change that much .
So I asked myself : Okay , is this a model for creation , this adaptation that we do ?
And does it happen anywhere else ?
Well , according to David Attenborough and some other people , birds do it too  -  -  that the birds in the canopy , where the foliage is dense , their calls tend to be high - pitched , short and repetitive .
And the birds on the floor tend to have lower pitched calls , so that they dont get distorted when they bounce off the forest floor .
And birds like this Savannah sparrow , they tend to have a buzzing type call .
And it turns out that a sound like this is the most energy efficient and practical way to transmit their call across the fields and savannahs .
Other birds , like this tanager , have adapted within the same species .
The tananger on the East Coast of the United States , where the forests are a little denser , has one kind of call , and the tananger on the other side , on the west has a different kind of call .
So birds do it too .
And I thought : Well , if this is a model for creation , if we make music , primarily the form at least , to fit these contexts , and if we make art to fit gallery walls or museum walls , and if we write software to fit existing operating systems , is that how it works ?
Yeah . I think its evolutionary .
Its adaptive .
But the pleasure and the passion and the joy is still there .
This is a reverse view of things from the kind of traditional Romantic view .
The Romantic view is that first comes the passion and then the outpouring of emotion , and then somehow it gets shaped into something .
And Im saying , well , the passions still there , but the vessel that its going to be injected into and poured into , that is instinctively and intuitively created first .
We already know where that passion is going .
But this conflict of views is kind of interesting .
The writer , Thomas Frank , says that this might be a kind of explanation why some voters vote against their best interests , that voters , like a lot of us , assume , that if they hear something that sounds like its sincere , that its coming from the gut , that its passionate , that its more authentic .
And theyll vote for that .
So that , if somebody can fake sincerity , if they can fake passion , they stand a better chance which seems a little dangerous .
Im saying the two , the passion , the joy , are not mutually exclusive .
Maybe what the world needs now is for us to realize that we are like the birds .
We adapt .
We sing .
And like the birds , the joy is still there , even though we have changed what we do to fit the context .
Thank you very much .
Kevin Breel : Confessions of a depressed comic
Kevin Breel didnt look like a depressed kid : team captain , at every party , funny and confident . But he tells the story of the night he realized that  -  -  to save his own life  -  -  he needed to say four simple words .
For a long time in my life , I felt like Id been living two different lives .
Theres the life that everyone sees , and then theres the life that only I see .
And in the life that everyone sees , who I am is a friend , a son , a brother , a stand - up comedian and a teenager .
Thats the life everyone sees .
If you were to ask my friends and family to describe me , thats what they would tell you .
And thats a huge part of me . That is who I am .
And if you were to ask me to describe myself , Id probably say some of those same things .
And I wouldnt be lying , but I wouldnt totally be telling you the truth , either , because the truth is , thats just the life everyone else sees .
In the life that only I see , who I am , who I really am , is someone who struggles intensely with depression .
I have for the last six years of my life , and I continue to every day .
Now , for someone who has never experienced depression or doesnt really know what that means , that might surprise them to hear , because theres this pretty popular misconception that depression is just being sad when something in your life goes wrong , when you break up with your girlfriend , when you lose a loved one , when you dont get the job you wanted .
But thats sadness . Thats a natural thing .
Thats a natural human emotion .
Real depression isnt being sad when something in your life goes wrong .
Real depression is being sad when everything in your life is going right .
Thats real depression , and thats what I suffer from .
And to be totally honest , thats hard for me to stand up here and say .
Its hard for me to talk about , and it seems to be hard for everyone to talk about , so much so that no ones talking about it .
And no ones talking about depression , but we need to be , because right now its a massive problem .
Its a massive problem .
But we dont see it on social media , right ?
We dont see it on Facebook . We dont see it on Twitter .
We dont see it on the news , because its not happy , its not fun , its not light .
And so because we dont see it , we dont see the severity of it .
But the severity of it and the seriousness of it is this : every 30 seconds , every 30 seconds , somewhere , someone in the world takes their own life because of depression , and it might be two blocks away , it might be two countries away , it might be two continents away , but its happening , and its happening every single day .
And we have a tendency , as a society , to look at that and go ,  So what ? 
So what ? We look at that , and we go ,  Thats your problem .
Thats their problem . 
We say were sad and we say were sorry , but we also say ,  So what ? 
Well , two years ago it was my problem , because I sat on the edge of my bed where Id sat a million times before and I was suicidal .
I was suicidal , and if you were to look at my life on the surface , you wouldnt see a kid who was suicidal .
Youd see a kid who was the captain of his basketball team , the drama and theater student of the year , the English student of the year , someone who was consistently on the honor roll and consistently at every party .
So you would say I wasnt depressed , you would say I wasnt suicidal , but you would be wrong .
You would be wrong . So I sat there that night beside a bottle of pills with a pen and paper in my hand and I thought about taking my own life and I came this close to doing it .
I came this close to doing it .
And I didnt , so that makes me one of the lucky ones , one of the people who gets to step out on the ledge and look down but not jump , one of the lucky ones who survives .
Well , I survived , and that just leaves me with my story , and my story is this : In four simple words , I suffer from depression .
I suffer from depression , and for a long time , I think , I was living two totally different lives , where one person was always afraid of the other .
I was afraid that people would see me for who I really was , that I wasnt the perfect , popular kid in high school everyone thought I was , that beneath my smile , there was struggle , and beneath my light , there was dark , and beneath my big personality just hid even bigger pain .
See , some people might fear girls not liking them back .
Some people might fear sharks . Some people might fear death .
But for me , for a large part of my life , I feared myself .
I feared my truth , I feared my honesty , I feared my vulnerability , and that fear made me feel like I was forced into a corner , like I was forced into a corner and there was only one way out , and so I thought about that way every single day .
I thought about it every single day , and if Im being totally honest , standing here Ive thought about it again since , because thats the sickness , thats the struggle , thats depression , and depression isnt chicken pox .
You dont beat it once and its gone forever .
Its something you live with . Its something you live in .
Its the roommate you cant kick out . Its the voice you cant ignore .
Its the feelings you cant seem to escape , the scariest part is that after a while , you become numb to it . It becomes normal for you , and what you really fear the most isnt the suffering inside of you .
Its the stigma inside of others , its the shame , its the embarrassment , its the disapproving look on a friends face , its the whispers in the hallway that youre weak , its the comments that youre crazy .
Thats what keeps you from getting help .
Thats what makes you hold it in and hide it .
Its the stigma . So you hold it in and you hide it , and you hold it in and you hide it , and even though its keeping you in bed every day and its making your life feel empty no matter how much you try and fill it , you hide it , because the stigma in our society around depression is very real .
Its very real , and if you think that it isnt , ask yourself this : Would you rather make your next Facebook status say youre having a tough time getting out of bed because you hurt your back or youre having a tough time getting out of bed every morning because youre depressed ?
Thats the stigma , because unfortunately , we live in a world where if you break your arm , everyone runs over to sign your cast , but if you tell people youre depressed , everyone runs the other way .
Thats the stigma .
We are so , so , so accepting of any body part breaking down other than our brains . And thats ignorance .
Thats pure ignorance , and that ignorance has created a world that doesnt understand depression , that doesnt understand mental health .
And thats ironic to me , because depression is one of the best documented problems we have in the world , yet its one of the least discussed .
We just push it aside and put it in a corner and pretend its not there and hope itll fix itself .
Well , it wont . It hasnt , and its not going to , because thats wishful thinking , and wishful thinking isnt a game plan , its procrastination , and we cant procrastinate on something this important .
The first step in solving any problem is recognizing there is one .
Well , we havent done that , so we cant really expect to find an answer when were still afraid of the question .
And I dont know what the solution is .
I wish I did , but I dont  -  -  but I think , I think it has to start here .
It has to start with me , it has to start with you , it has to start with the people who are suffering , the ones who are hidden in the shadows .
We need to speak up and shatter the silence .
We need to be the ones who are brave for what we believe in , because if theres one thing that Ive come to realize , if theres one thing that I see as the biggest problem , its not in building a world where we eliminate the ignorance of others .
Its in building a world where we teach the acceptance of ourselves , where were okay with who we are , because when we get honest , we see that we all struggle and we all suffer .
Whether its with this , whether its with something else , we all know what it is to hurt .
We all know what it is to have pain in our heart , and we all know how important it is to heal .
But right now , depression is societys deep cut that were content to put a Band - Aid over and pretend its not there .
Well , it is there . It is there , and you know what ? Its okay .
Depression is okay . If youre going through it , know that youre okay .
And know that youre sick , youre not weak , and its an issue , not an identity , because when you get past the fear and the ridicule and the judgment and the stigma of others , you can see depression for what it really is , and thats just a part of life , just a part of life , and as much as I hate , as much as I hate some of the places , some of the parts of my life depression has dragged me down to , in a lot of ways Im grateful for it .
Because yeah , its put me in the valleys , but only to show me theres peaks , and yeah its dragged me through the dark but only to remind me there is light .
My pain , more than anything in 19 years on this planet , has given me perspective , and my hurt , my hurt has forced me to have hope , have hope and to have faith , faith in myself , faith in others , faith that it can get better , that we can change this , that we can speak up and speak out and fight back against ignorance , fight back against intolerance , and more than anything , learn to love ourselves , learn to accept ourselves for who we are , the people we are , not the people the world wants us to be .
Because the world I believe in is one where embracing your light doesnt mean ignoring your dark .
The world I believe in is one where were measured by our ability to overcome adversities , not avoid them .
The world I believe in is one where I can look someone in the eye and say ,  Im going through hell ,  and they can look back at me and go ,  Me too ,  and thats okay , and its okay because depression is okay . Were people .
Were people , and we struggle and we suffer and we bleed and we cry , and if you think that true strength means never showing any weakness , then Im here to tell you youre wrong .
Youre wrong , because its the opposite .
Were people , and we have problems .
Were not perfect , and thats okay .
So we need to stop the ignorance , stop the intolerance , stop the stigma , and stop the silence , and we need to take away the taboos , take a look at the truth , and start talking , because the only way were going to beat a problem that people are battling alone is by standing strong together , by standing strong together .
And I believe that we can .
I believe that we can . Thank you guys so much .
This is a dream come true . Thank you .
Thank you .
Ronny Edry : Israel and Iran : A love story ?
When war between Israel and Iran seemed imminent , Israeli graphic designer Ronny Edry shared a poster on Facebook of himself and his daughter with a bold message :  Iranians ... we  heart  you .  Other Israelis quickly created their own posters with the same message  -  -  and Iranians responded in kind . The simple act of communication inspired surprising Facebook communities like  Israel loves Iran ,   Iran loves Israel  and even  Palestine loves Israel . 
On March 14 , this year , I posted this poster on Facebook .
This is an image of me and my daughter holding the Israeli flag .
I will try to explain to you about the context of why and when I posted .
A few days ago , I was sitting waiting on the line at the grocery store , and the owner and one of the clients were talking to each other , and the owner was explaining to the client that were going to get 10,000 missiles on Israel .
And the client was saying , no , its 10,000 a day .
This is the context . This is where we are now in Israel .
We have this war with Iran coming for 10 years now , and we have people , you know , afraid .
Its like every year its the last minute that we can do something about the war with Iran .
Its like , if we dont act now , its too late forever , for 10 years now .
So at some point it became , you know , to me , Im a graphic designer , so I made posters about it and I posted the one I just showed you before .
Most of the time , I make posters , I post them on Facebook , my friends like it , dont like it , most of the time dont like it , dont share it , dont nothing , and its another day .
So I went to sleep , and that was it for me .
And later on in the night , I woke up because Im always waking up in the night , and I went by the computer and I see all these red dots , you know , on Facebook , which Ive never seen before .
And I was like ,  Whats going on ? 
So I come to the computer and I start looking on , and suddenly I see many people talking to me , most of them I dont know , and a few of them from Iran , which is  -  -  What ?
Because you have to understand , in Israel we dont talk with people from Iran .
We dont know people from Iran .
Its like , on Facebook , you have friends only from  -  -  its like your neighbors are your friends on Facebook .
And now people from Iran are talking to me .
So I start answering this girl , and shes telling me she saw the poster and she asked her family to come , because they dont have a computer , she asked her family to come to see the poster , and theyre all sitting in the living room crying .
So Im like , whoa .
I ask my wife to come , and I tell her , you have to see that .
People are crying , and she came , she read the text , and she started to cry .
And everybodys crying now .
So I dont know what to do , so my first reflex , as a graphic designer , is , you know , to show everybody what Id just seen , and people started to see them and to share them , and thats how it started .
The day after , when really it became a lot of talking , I said to myself , and my wife said to me , I also want a poster , so this is her .
Because its working , put me in a poster now .
But more seriously , I was like , okay , these ones work , but its not just about me , its about people from Israel who want to say something .
So Im going to shoot all the people I know , if they want , and Im going to put them in a poster and Im going to share them .
So I went to my neighbors and friends and students and I just asked them , give me a picture , I will make you a poster .
And thats how it started . And thats how , really , its unleashed , because suddenly people from Facebook , friends and others , just understand that they can be part of it .
Its not just one dude making one poster , its  -  -  we can be part of it , so they start sending me pictures and ask me ,  Make me a poster . Post it .
Tell the Iranians we from Israel love you too . 
It became , you know , at some point it was really , really intense .
I mean , so many pictures , so I asked friends to come , graphic designers most of them , to make posters with me , because I didnt have the time .
It was a huge amount of pictures .
So for a few days , thats how my living room was .
And we received Israeli posters , Israeli images , but also lots of comments , lots of messages from Iran .
And we took these messages and we made posters out of it , because I know people : They dont read , they see images .
If its an image , they may read it .
So here are a few of them .
This one is really moving for me because its the story of a girl who has been raised in Iran to walk on an Israeli flag to enter her school every morning , and now that she sees the posters that were sending , she starts  -  -  she said that she changed her mind , and now she loves that blue , she loves that star , and she loves that flag , talking about the Israeli flag , and she wished that wed meet and come to visit one another , and just a few days after I posted the first poster .
The day after , Iranians started to respond with their own posters .
They have graphic designers . What ?
Crazy , crazy .
So you can see they are still shy , they dont want to show their faces , but they want to spread the message .
They want to respond . They want to say the same thing .
So . And now its communication .
Its a two - way story . Its Israelis and Iranians sending the same message , one to each other .
This never happened before , and this is two people supposed to be enemies , were on the verge of a war , and suddenly people on Facebook are starting to say ,  I like this guy . I love those guys . 
And it became really big at some point .
And then it became news .
Because when youre seeing the Middle East , you see only the bad news .
And suddenly , there is something that was happening that was good news . So the guys on the news , they say ,  Okay , lets talk about this . 
I remember one day , Michal , she was talking with the journalist , and she was asking him ,  Whos gonna see the show ?  And he said ,  Everybody . 
So she said ,  Everybody in Palestine , in where ? Israel ?
Who is everybody ?   Everybody . 
They said ,  Syria ?   Syria . 
 Lebanon ?   Lebanon . 
At some point , he just said ,  40 million people are going to see you today .
Its everybody .  The Chinese .
And we were just at the beginning of the story .
Something crazy also happened .
Every time a country started talking about it , like Germany , America , wherever , a page on Facebook popped up with the same logo with the same stories , so at the beginning we had  Iran - Loves - Israel ,  which is an Iranian sitting in Tehran , saying ,  Okay , Israel loves Iran ?
I give you Iran - Loves - Israel . 
You have Palestine - Loves - Israel .
You have Lebanon that just  -  -  a few days ago .
And this whole list of pages on Facebook dedicated to the same message , to people sending their love , one to each other .
The moment I really understood that something was happening , a friend of mine told me ,  Google the word Israel .  And those were the first images on those days that popped up from Google when you were typing ,  Israel  or  Iran . 
We really changed how people see the Middle East .
Because youre not in the Middle East .
Youre somewhere over there , and then you want to see the Middle East , so you go on Google and you say ,  Israel ,  and they give you the bad stuff .
And for a few days you got those images .
Today the Israel - Loves - Iran page is this number , 80,831 , and two million people last week went on the page and shared , liked , I dont know , commented on one of the photos .
So for five months now , thats what we are doing , me , Michal , a few of my friends , are just making images .
Were showing a new reality by just making images because thats how the world perceives us .
They see images of us , and they see bad images .
So were working on making good images . End of story .
Look at this one . This is the Iran - Loves - Israel page .
This is not the Israel - Loves - Iran . This is not my page .
This is a guy in Tehran on the day of remembrance of the Israeli fallen soldier putting an image of an Israeli soldier on his page .
This is the enemy .
What ?
And its going both ways .
Its like , we are showing respect , one to each other .
And were understanding . And you show compassion .
And you become friends .
And at some point , you become friends on Facebook , and you become friends in life .
You can go and travel and meet people .
And I was in Munich a few weeks ago .
I went there to open an exposition about Iran and I met there with people from the page that told me ,  Okay , youre going to be in Europe , Im coming . Im coming from France , from Holland , from Germany ,  of course , and from Israel people came , and we just met there for the first time in real life .
I met with people that are supposed to be my enemies for the first time . And we just shake hands , and have a coffee and a nice discussion , and we talk about food and basketball .
And that was the end of it .
Remember that image from the beginning ?
At some point we met in real life , and we became friends .
And it goes the other way around .
Some girl that we met on Facebook never been in Israel , born and raised in Iran , lives in Germany , afraid of Israelis because of what she knows about us , decides after a few months of talking on the Internet with some Israelis to come to Israel , and she gets on the plane and arrives at Ben Gurion and says ,  Okay , not that big a deal . 
So a few weeks ago , the stress is getting higher , so we start this new campaign called  Not ready to die in your war . 
I mean , its plus / minus the same message , but we wanted really to add some aggressivity to it .
And again , something amazing happened , something that we didnt have on the first wave of the campaign .
Now people from Iran , the same ones who were shy at the first campaign and just sent , you know , their foot and half their faces , now theyre sending their faces , and theyre saying ,  Okay , no problem , were into it . We are with you . 
Just read where those guys are from .
And for every guy from Israel , youve got someone from Iran .
Just people sending their pictures .
Crazy , yes ?
So  -  -  So you may ask yourself , who is this dude ?
My name is Ronny Edry , and Im 41 , Im an Israeli , Im a father of two , Im a husband , and Im a graphic designer . Im teaching graphic design .
And Im not that naive , because a lot of the time Ive been asked , many times Ive been asked ,  Yeah , but , this is really naive , sending flowers over , I mean —  I was in the army . I was in the paratroopers for three years , and I know how it looks from the ground .
I know how it can look really bad .
So to me , this is the courageous thing to do , to try to reach the other side before its too late , because when its going to be too late , its going to be too late .
And sometimes war is inevitable , sometimes , but maybe  with  effort , we can avoid it .
Maybe as people , because especially in Israel , were in a democracy . We have the freedom of speech , and maybe that little thing can change something .
And really , we can be our own ambassadors .
We can just send a message and hope for the best .
So I want to ask Michal , my wife , to come with me on the stage just to make with you one image , because its all about images .
And maybe that image will help us change something .
Just raise that . Exactly .
And Im just going to take a picture of it , and Im just going to post it on Facebook with kind of  Israelis for peace  or something .
Oh my God .
Dont cry .
Thank you guys .
Charles Moore : Seas of plastic
Capt . Charles Moore of the Algalita Marine Research Foundation first discovered the Great Pacific Garbage Patch  -  -  an endless floating waste of plastic trash . Now hes drawing attention to the growing , choking problem of plastic debris in our seas .
Lets talk trash .
You know , we had to be taught to renounce the powerful conservation ethic we developed during the Great Depression and World War II .
After the war , we needed to direct our enormous production capacity toward creation of products for peacetime .
Life Magazine helped in this effort by announcing the introduction of throwaways that would liberate the housewife from the drudgery of doing dishes .
Mental note to the liberators : throwaway plastics take a lot of space and dont biodegrade .
Only we humans make waste that nature cant digest .
Plastics are also hard to recycle .
A teacher told me how to express the under - five - percent of plastics recovered in our waste stream .
Its diddly - point - squat .
Thats the percentage we recycle .
Now , melting point has a lot to do with this .
Plastic is not purified by the re - melting process like glass and metal .
It begins to melt below the boiling point of water and does not drive off the oily contaminants for which it is a sponge .
Half of each years 100 billion pounds of thermal plastic pellets will be made into fast - track trash .
A large , unruly fraction of our trash will flow downriver to the sea .
Here is the accumulation at Biona Creek next to the L.A . airport .
And here is the flotsam near California State University Long Beach and the diesel plant we visited yesterday .
In spite of deposit fees , much of this trash leading out to the sea will be plastic beverage bottles .
We use two million of them in the United States every five minutes , here imaged by TED presenter Chris Jordan , who artfully documents mass consumption and zooms in for more detail .
Here is a remote island repository for bottles off the coast of Baja California .
Isla San Roque is an uninhabited bird rookery off Bajas sparsely populated central coast .
Notice that the bottles here have caps on them .
Bottles made of polyethylene terephthalate , PET , will sink in seawater and not make it this far from civilization .
Also , the caps are produced in separate factories from a different plastic , polypropylene .
They will float in seawater , but unfortunately do not get recycled under the bottle bills .
Lets trace the journey of the millions of caps that make it to sea solo .
After a year the ones from Japan are heading straight across the Pacific , while ours get caught in the California current and first head down to the latitude of Cabo San Lucas .
After ten years , a lot of the Japanese caps are in what we call the Eastern Garbage Patch , while ours litter the Philippines .
After 20 years , we see emerging the debris accumulation zone of the North Pacific Gyre .
It so happens that millions of albatross nesting on Kure and Midway atolls in the Northwest Hawaiian Islands National Monument forage here and scavenge whatever they can find for regurgitation to their chicks .
A four - month old Laysan Albatross chick died with this in its stomach .
Hundreds of thousands of the goose - sized chicks are dying with stomachs full of bottle caps and other rubbish , like cigarette lighters ...
but , mostly bottle caps .
Sadly , their parents mistake bottle caps for food tossing about in the ocean surface .
The retainer rings for the caps also have consequences for aquatic animals .
This is Mae West , still alive at a zookeepers home in New Orleans .
I wanted to see what my home town of Long Beach was contributing to the problem , so on Coastal Clean - Up Day in 2005 I went to the Long Beach Peninsula , at the east end of our long beach .
We cleaned up the swaths of beach shown .
I offered five cents each for bottle caps .
I got plenty of takers .
Here are the 1,100 bottle caps they collected .
I thought I would spend 20 bucks .
That day I ended up spending nearly 60 .
I separated them by color and put them on display the next Earth Day at Cabrillo Marine Aquarium in San Pedro .
Governor Schwarzenegger and his wife Maria stopped by to discuss the display .
In spite of my  girly man  hat , crocheted from plastic shopping bags , they shook my hand .
I showed him and Maria a zooplankton trawl from the gyre north of Hawaii with more plastic than plankton .
Heres what our trawl samples from the plastic soup our ocean has become look like .
Trawling a zooplankton net on the surface for a mile produces samples like this .
And this .
Now , when the debris washes up on the beaches of Hawaii it looks like this .
And this particular beach is Kailua Beach , the beach where our president and his family vacationed before moving to Washington .
Now , how do we analyze samples like this one that contain more plastic than plankton ?
We sort the plastic fragments into different size classes , from five millimeters to one - third of a millimeter .
Small bits of plastic concentrate persistent organic pollutants up to a million times their levels in the surrounding seawater .
We wanted to see if the most common fish in the deep ocean , at the base of the food chain , was ingesting these poison pills .
We did hundreds of necropsies , and over a third had polluted plastic fragments in their stomachs .
The record - holder , only two - and - a - half inches long , had 84 pieces in its tiny stomach .
Now , you can buy certified organic produce .
But no fishmonger on Earth can sell you a certified organic wild - caught fish .
This is the legacy we are leaving to future generations .
The throwaway society can not be contained  -  -  it has gone global .
We simply can not store and maintain or recycle all our stuff .
We have to throw it away .
Now , the market can do a lot for us , but it cant fix the natural system in the ocean weve broken .
All the kings horses and all the kings men ...
will never gather up all the plastic and put the ocean back together again .
Narrator : The levels are increasing , the amount of packaging is increasing , the  throwaway  concept of living is proliferating , and its showing up in the ocean .
Anchor : He offers no hope of cleaning it up .
Straining the ocean for plastic would be beyond the budget of any country and it might kill untold amounts of sea life in the process .
The solution , Moore says , is to stop the plastic at its source : stop it on land before it falls in the ocean .
And in a plastic - wrapped and packaged world , he doesnt hold out much hope for that , either .
This is Brian Rooney for Nightline , in Long Beach , California .
Charles Moore : Thank you .
Carolyn Steel : How food shapes our cities
Every day , in a city the size of London , 30 million meals are served . But where does all the food come from ? Architect Carolyn Steel discusses the daily miracle of feeding a city , and shows how ancient food routes shaped the modern world .
How do you feed a city ?
Its one of the great questions of our time .
Yet its one thats rarely asked .
We take it for granted that if we go into a shop or restaurant , or indeed into this theaters foyer in about an hours time , there is going to be food there waiting for us , having magically come from somewhere .
But when you think that every day for a city the size of London , enough food has to be produced , transported , bought and sold , cooked , eaten , disposed of , and that something similar has to happen every day for every city on earth , its remarkable that cities get fed at all .
We live in places like this as if theyre the most natural things in the world , forgetting that because were animals and that we need to eat , were actually as dependent on the natural world as our ancient ancestors were .
And as more of us move into cities , more of that natural world is being transformed into extraordinary landscapes like the one behind me  -  -  its soybean fields in Mato Grosso in Brazil  -  -  in order to feed us .
These are extraordinary landscapes , but few of us ever get to see them .
And increasingly these landscapes are not just feeding us either .
As more of us move into cities , more of us are eating meat , so that a third of the annual grain crop globally now gets fed to animals rather than to us human animals .
And given that it takes three times as much grain  -  -  actually ten times as much grain  -  -  to feed a human if its passed through an animal first , thats not a very efficient way of feeding us .
And its an escalating problem too .
By 2050 , its estimated that twice the number of us are going to be living in cities .
And its also estimated that there is going to be twice as much meat and dairy consumed .
So meat and urbanism are rising hand in hand .
And thats going to pose an enormous problem .
Six billion hungry carnivores to feed , by 2050 .
Thats a big problem . And actually if we carry on as we are , its a problem were very unlikely to be able to solve .
Nineteen million hectares of rainforest are lost every year to create new arable land .
Although at the same time were losing an equivalent amount of existing arables to salinization and erosion .
Were very hungry for fossil fuels too .
It takes about 10 calories to produce every calorie of food that we consume in the West .
And even though there is food that we are producing at great cost , we dont actually value it .
Half the food produced in the USA is currently thrown away .
And to end all of this , at the end of this long process , were not even managing to feed the planet properly .
A billion of us are obese , while a further billion starve .
None of it makes very much sense .
And when you think that 80 percent of global trade in food now is controlled by just five multinational corporations , its a grim picture .
As were moving into cities , the world is also embracing a Western diet .
And if we look to the future , its an unsustainable diet .
So how did we get here ?
And more importantly , what are we going to do about it ?
Well , to answer the slightly easier question first , about 10,000 years ago , I would say , is the beginning of this process in the ancient Near East , known as the Fertile Crescent .
Because , as you can see , it was crescent shaped .
And it was also fertile .
And it was here , about 10,000 years ago , that two extraordinary inventions , agriculture and urbanism , happened roughly in the same place and at the same time .
This is no accident , because agriculture and cities are bound together . They need each other .
Because it was discovery of grain by our ancient ancestors for the first time that produced a food source that was large enough and stable enough to support permanent settlements .
And if we look at what those settlements were like , we see they were compact .
They were surrounded by productive farm land and dominated by large temple complexes like this one at Ur , that were , in fact , effectively , spiritualized , central food distribution centers .
Because it was the temples that organized the harvest , gathered in the grain , offered it to the gods , and then offered the grain that the gods didnt eat back to the people .
So , if you like , the whole spiritual and physical life of these cities was dominated by the grain and the harvest that sustained them .
And in fact , thats true of every ancient city .
But of course not all of them were that small .
Famously , Rome had about a million citizens by the first century A.D .
So how did a city like this feed itself ?
The answer is what I call  ancient food miles . 
Basically , Rome had access to the sea , which made it possible for it to import food from a very long way away .
This is the only way it was possible to do this in the ancient world , because it was very difficult to transport food over roads , which were rough .
And the food obviously went off very quickly .
So Rome effectively waged war on places like Carthage and Egypt just to get its paws on their grain reserves .
And , in fact , you could say that the expansion of the Empire was really sort of one long , drawn out militarized shopping spree , really .
In fact  -  -  I love the fact , I just have to mention this : Rome in fact used to import oysters from London , at one stage . I think thats extraordinary .
So Rome shaped its hinterland through its appetite .
But the interesting thing is that the other thing also happened in the pre - industrial world .
If we look at a map of London in the 17th century , we can see that its grain , which is coming in from the Thames , along the bottom of this map .
So the grain markets were to the south of the city .
And the roads leading up from them to Cheapside , which was the main market , were also grain markets .
And if you look at the name of one of those streets , Bread Street , you can tell what was going on there 300 years ago .
And the same of course was true for fish .
Fish was , of course , coming in by river as well . Same thing .
And of course Billingsgate , famously , was Londons fish market , operating on - site here until the mid - 1980s .
Which is extraordinary , really , when you think about it .
Everybody else was wandering around with mobile phones that looked like bricks and sort of smelly fish happening down on the port .
This is another thing about food in cities : Once its roots into the city are established , they very rarely move .
Meat is a very different story because , of course , animals could walk into the city .
So much of Londons meat was coming from the northwest , from Scotland and Wales .
So it was coming in , and arriving at the city at the northwest , which is why Smithfield , Londons very famous meat market , was located up there .
Poultry was coming in from East Anglia and so on , to the northeast .
I feel a bit like a weather woman doing this . Anyway , and so the birds were coming in with their feet protected with little canvas shoes .
And then when they hit the eastern end of Cheapside , thats where they were sold , which is why its called Poultry .
And , in fact , if you look at the map of any city built before the industrial age , you can trace food coming in to it .
You can actually see how it was physically shaped by food , both by reading the names of the streets , which give you a lot of clues .
Friday Street , in a previous life , is where you went to buy your fish on a Friday .
But also you have to imagine it full of food .
Because the streets and the public spaces were the only places where food was bought and sold .
And if we look at an image of Smithfield in 1830 you can see that it would have been very difficult to live in a city like this and be unaware of where your food came from .
In fact , if you were having Sunday lunch , the chances were it was mooing or bleating outside your window about three days earlier .
So this was obviously an organic city , part of an organic cycle .
And then 10 years later everything changed .
This is an image of the Great Western in 1840 .
And as you can see , some of the earliest train passengers were pigs and sheep .
So all of a sudden , these animals are no longer walking into market .
Theyre being slaughtered out of sight and mind , somewhere in the countryside .
And theyre coming into the city by rail .
And this changes everything .
To start off with , it makes it possible for the first time to grow cities , really any size and shape , in any place .
Cities used to be constrained by geography ; they used to have to get their food through very difficult physical means .
All of a sudden they are effectively emancipated from geography .
And as you can see from these maps of London , in the 90 years after the trains came , it goes from being a little blob that was quite easy to feed by animals coming in on foot , and so on , to a large splurge , that would be very , very difficult to feed with anybody on foot , either animals or people .
And of course that was just the beginning . After the trains came cars , and really this marks the end of this process .
Its the final emancipation of the city from any apparent relationship with nature at all .
And this is the kind of city thats devoid of smell , devoid of mess , certainly devoid of people , because nobody would have dreamed of walking in such a landscape .
In fact , what they did to get food was they got in their cars , drove to a box somewhere on the outskirts , came back with a weeks worth of shopping , and wondered what on earth to do with it .
And this really is the moment when our relationship , both with food and cities , changes completely .
Here we have food  -  -  that used to be the center , the social core of the city  -  -  at the periphery .
It used to be a social event , buying and selling food .
Now its anonymous .
We used to cook ; now we just add water , or a little bit of an egg if youre making a cake or something .
We dont smell food to see if its okay to eat .
We just read the back of a label on a packet .
And we dont value food . We dont trust it .
So instead of trusting it , we fear it .
And instead of valuing it , we throw it away .
One of the great ironies of modern food systems is that theyve made the very thing they promised to make easier much harder .
By making it possible to build cities anywhere and any place , theyve actually distanced us from our most important relationship , which is that of us and nature .
And also theyve made us dependent on systems that only they can deliver , that , as weve seen , are unsustainable .
So what are we going to do about that ?
Its not a new question .
500 years ago its what Thomas More was asking himself .
This is the frontispiece of his book  Utopia . 
And it was a series of semi - independent city - states , if that sounds remotely familiar , a days walk from one another where everyone was basically farming - mad , and grew vegetables in their back gardens , and ate communal meals together , and so on .
And I think you could argue that food is a fundamental ordering principle of Utopia , even though More never framed it that way .
And here is another very famous  Utopian  vision , that of Ebenezer Howard ,  The Garden City . 
Same idea : series of semi - independent city - states , little blobs of metropolitan stuff with arable land around , joined to one another by railway .
the ordering principle of his vision .
It even got built , but nothing to do with this vision that Howard had .
And that is the problem with these Utopian ideas , that they are Utopian .
Utopia was actually a word that Thomas Moore used deliberately .
It was a kind of joke , because its got a double derivation from the Greek .
It can either mean a good place , or no place .
Because its an ideal . Its an imaginary thing . We cant have it .
And I think , as a conceptual tool for thinking about the very deep problem of human dwelling , that makes it not much use .
So Ive come up with an alternative , which is Sitopia , from the ancient Greek ,  sitos  for food , and  topos  for place .
I believe we already live in Sitopia .
We live in a world shaped by food , and if we realize that , we can use food as a really powerful tool  -  -  a conceptual tool , design tool , to shape the world differently .
So if we were to do that , what might Sitopia look like ?
Well I think it looks a bit like this .
I have to use this slide . Its just the look on the face of the dog .
But anyway , this is  -  -  its food at the center of life , at the center of family life , being celebrated , being enjoyed , people taking time for it .
This is where food should be in our society .
But you cant have scenes like this unless you have people like this .
By the way , these can be men as well .
Its people who think about food , who think ahead , who plan , who can stare at a pile of raw vegetables and actually recognize them .
We need these people . Were part of a network .
Because without these kinds of people we cant have places like this .
Here , I deliberately chose this because it is a man buying a vegetable .
But networks , markets where food is being grown locally .
Its common . Its fresh .
Its part of the social life of the city .
Because without that , you cant have this kind of place , food that is grown locally and also is part of the landscape , and is not just a zero - sum commodity off in some unseen hell - hole .
Cows with a view .
Steaming piles of humus .
This is basically bringing the whole thing together .
And this is a community project I visited recently in Toronto .
Its a greenhouse , where kids get told all about food and growing their own food .
Here is a plant called Kevin , or maybe its a plant belonging to a kid called Kevin . I dont know .
But anyway , these kinds of projects that are trying to reconnect us with nature is extremely important .
So Sitopia , for me , is really a way of seeing .
Its basically recognizing that Sitopia already exists in little pockets everywhere .
The trick is to join them up , to use food as a way of seeing .
And if we do that , were going to stop seeing cities as big , metropolitan , unproductive blobs , like this .
Were going to see them more like this , as part of the productive , organic framework of which they are inevitably a part , symbiotically connected .
But of course , thats not a great image either , because we need not to be producing food like this anymore .
We need to be thinking more about permaculture , which is why I think this image just sums up for me the kind of thinking we need to be doing .
Its a re - conceptualization of the way food shapes our lives .
The best image I know of this is from 650 years ago .
Its Ambrogio Lorenzettis  Allegory of Good Government . 
Its about the relationship between the city and the countryside .
And I think the message of this is very clear .
If the city looks after the country , the country will look after the city .
And I want us to ask now , what would Ambrogio Lorenzetti paint if he painted this image today ?
What would an allegory of good government look like today ?
Because I think its an urgent question .
Its one we have to ask , and we have to start answering .
We know we are what we eat .
We need to realize that the world is also what we eat .
But if we take that idea , we can use food as a really powerful tool to shape the world better .
Thank you very much .
Eddi Reader :  Kiteflyers Hill 
Singer / songwriter Eddi Reader performs  Kiteflyers Hill ,  a tender look back at a lost love . With Thomas Dolby on piano .
This is about a place in London called Kiteflyers Hill where I used to go and spend hours going  When is he coming back ? When is he coming back ? 
So this is another one dedicated to that guy ...
who Ive got over .
But this is  Kiteflyers Hill . 
Its a beautiful song written by a guy called Martin Evan , actually , for me .
Boo Hewerdine , Thomas Dolby , thank you very much for inviting me . Its been a blessing singing for you .
Thank you very much .
Do you remember when we used to go up to Kiteflyers Hill ? Those summer nights , so still with all of the city beneath us and all of our lives ahead before cruel and foolish words were cruelly and foolishly said Some nights I think of you and then I go up on Kiteflyers Hill wrapped up against the winter chill And somewhere in the city beneath me you lie asleep in your bed and I wonder if ever just briefly do I creep in your dreams now and then Where are you now ? My wild summer love Where are you now ? Have the years been kind ? And do you think of me sometimes up on Kiteflyers Hill ? Oh , I pray you one day will We wont say a word We wont need them Sometimes silence is best Well just stand in the still of the evening and whisper farewell to loneliness Where are you now ? My wild summer love Where are you now ? Do you think of me sometimes ? And do you ever make that climb ? Where are you now ? My wild summer love Where are you now ? Have the years been kind ? And do you ever make that climb up on Kiteflyers Hill ? Kiteflyers ...  French  Where are you ? Where are you now ? Where are you now ? Kiteflyers ... Gracias . Thank you very much .
Christopher C . Deam : The Airstream , restyled
In this low - key , image - packed talk from 2002 , designer Christopher C . Deam talks about his makeover of an American classic : the Airstream travel trailer .
a plastic laminate company , which is the largest plastic laminate company in the world  -  -  they asked me to design a trade show booth for exhibition at the International Contemporary Furniture Fair in New York , in 2000 .
So looking at their three main markets for their product which were basically transportation design , interiors and furniture , we came up with the solution of taking an old Airstream trailer and gutting it , and trying to portray laminate , and a trailer , in kind of a fresh , new contemporary look .
When this trailer showed up at my shop in Berkeley , Id actually never stepped foot in an Airstream trailer , or any other trailer .
So I can be somebody that can look at this in a totally fresh perspective and see if I can optimize it in its most idealistic fashion .
I decided I had to do some research and really figure out what had gone wrong somewhere along the history of Airstream .
What I discovered in these interiors is that there was a disconnect between the exterior shell and the interior architecture of the pieces .
In that the shell was originally conceived as a lightweight , modern , futuristic , high - tech pod for hurtling down the freeway , and the interiors were completely out of sync with that .
In fact it appeared like they referenced a mountain cabin .
That seemed really like a crisis to me , that they had never been able to develop a vocabulary about escape , and about travel , and modernity in this trailer that was consistent with the shell .
We really needed to do some archeology in the trailer itself to figure out whats authentic in an Airstream trailer , and what feels like it has true purpose and utility .
We stripped out all the vinyl and zolatone paint that was covering up this just fantastic aluminum shell .
We took off all the visible hardware and trim that was kind of doing the country cabin thing .
I literally drew on the walls of the trailer , mocked it up in cardboard , wed come in and cut , decide things were wrong , pull it out , put it back in .
The main goal was to smooth out the interior , and begin to speak about motion , and mobility , and independence .
The biggest difficulty on one of these trailers is that when youre designing theres actually no logical place to stop and start materials because of the continuous form of the trailer .
Theres no such things as two walls and a ceiling coming together , where you can change materials and shapes .
So that became a challenge .
Compounding that , the material of choice , laminate , that I was trying to highlight , only bends in two dimensions .
Its a compound curve interior .
What I had to devise was a way of fooling the eye into believing that all these panels are curved with the shell .
What I came up with was a series of second skins that basically float over the aluminum shell .
And what I was trying to do there was direct your eye in the space , so that you would perceive the geometry in a different way , and that the casework wouldnt break up the space .
They also gave us a way to run power and rewire the trailer without tearing out the skin , so they function as an electrical chase .
Thats the trailer , pretty much finished .
That trailer led to another commission , to participate in whats called Tokyo Designers Block .
Its a week of furniture design events in Tokyo , in October .
Teruo Kurosaki , who owns a furniture company called Idee , he asked me to ship him two trailers to Tokyo .
He said one he would like to make a real trailer , functioning , and we would sell that one .
Trailer number two , you have a blank slate , you can to anything you want .
We came up with a fantasy scenario of a DJ traveling around the States , that would collect records and go on tours .
This trailer housed two turntables , mixer , wet bar , fridge , integrated sound system .
Its got a huge couch , fits quite a few people , and basically wed had a great time with this .
And so in this trailer I took it upon myself to think about travel , and escape , in an idiosyncratic sense .
A lot of these ideas migrated into the production trailers for Airstream .
This brings us up to the time that I started consulting to Airstream .
They came to me and said ,  Well , what can we do to freshen this thing up ?
And do you think kids , you know , skateboarders , surfers , rock climbers , would use these things ? 
And I said ,  Well , not in that interior . 
Anyway , I went out to Airstream about six times during the process of building this prototype , and its called the Bambi prototype .
I thought ,  Finally , oh yeah great , big company , Im gonna work with somebody with money for tooling and molding . 
And I walked in their prototype facility , and its exactly like my shop , only bigger  -  -  same tools , same things .
So the problem became  -  -  and they set this dilemma to me  -  -  that you have to design the interior using only our existing technology , and theres no money for tooling or molding .
The trailers themselves are actually hand - built .
All the casework is hand - scribed in , uniquely , so you cant just cut 100 parts for 100 trailers , you have to cut them big , and every single one is hand - fit .
They didnt want to go to a componentized system .
And there it is , thats the Bambi 16 .
Elliot Krane : The mystery of chronic pain
We think of pain as a symptom , but there are cases where the nervous system develops feedback loops and pain becomes a terrifying disease in itself . Starting with the story of a girl whose sprained wrist turned into a nightmare , Elliot Krane talks about the complex mystery of chronic pain , and reviews the facts were just learning about how it works and how to treat it .
Im a pediatrician and an anesthesiologist , so I put children to sleep for a living .
And Im an academic , so I put audiences to sleep for free .
But what I actually mostly do is I manage the pain management service at the Packard Childrens Hospital up at Stanford in Palo Alto .
And its from the experience from about 20 or 25 years of doing that that I want to bring to you the message this morning , that pain is a disease .
Now most of the time , you think of pain as a symptom of a disease , and thats true most of the time .
Its the symptom of a tumor or an infection or an inflammation or an operation .
But about 10 percent of the time , after the patient has recovered from one of those events , pain persists .
It persists for months and oftentimes for years , and when that happens , it is its own disease .
And before I tell you about how it is that we think that happens and what we can do about it , I want to show you how it feels for my patients .
So imagine , if you will , that Im stroking your arm with this feather , as Im stroking my arm right now .
Now , I want you to imagine that Im stroking it with this .
Please keep your seat .
A very different feeling .
Now what does it have to do with chronic pain ?
Imagine , if you will , these two ideas together .
Imagine what your life would be like if I were to stroke it with this feather , but your brain was telling you that this is what you are feeling  -  -  and that is the experience of my patients with chronic pain .
In fact , imagine something even worse .
Imagine I were to stroke your childs arm with this feather , and their brain  was  telling them that they were feeling this hot torch .
That was the experience of my patient , Chandler , whom you see in the photograph .
As you can see , shes a beautiful , young woman .
She was 16 years old last year when I met her , and she aspired to be a professional dancer .
And during the course of one of her dance rehearsals , she fell on her outstretched arm and sprained her wrist .
Now you would probably imagine , as she did , that a wrist sprain is a trivial event in a persons life .
Wrap it in an ACE bandage , take some ibuprofen for a week or two , and thats the end of the story .
But in Chandlers case , that was the beginning of the story .
This is what her arm looked like when she came to my clinic about three months after her sprain .
You can see that the arm is discolored , purplish in color .
It was cadaverically cold to the touch .
The muscles were frozen , paralyzed  -  -  dystonic is how we refer to that .
The pain had spread from her wrist to her hands , to her fingertips , from her wrist up to her elbow , almost all the way to her shoulder .
But the worst part was , not the spontaneous pain that was there 24 hours a day .
The worst part was that she had allodynia , the medical term for the phenomenon that I just illustrated with the feather and with the torch .
The lightest touch of her arm  -  -  the touch of a hand , the touch even of a sleeve , of a garment , as she put it on  -  -  caused excruciating , burning pain .
How can the nervous system get this so wrong ?
How can the nervous system misinterpret an innocent sensation like the touch of a hand and turn it into the malevolent sensation of the touch of the flame ?
Well you probably imagine that the nervous system in the body is hardwired like your house .
In your house , wires run in the wall , from the light switch to a junction box in the ceiling and from the junction box to the light bulb .
And when you turn the switch on , the light goes on .
And when you turn the switch off , the light goes off .
So people imagine the nervous system is just like that .
If you hit your thumb with a hammer , these wires in your arm  -  -  that , of course , we call nerves  -  -  transmit the information into the junction box in the spinal cord where new wires , new nerves , take the information up to the brain where you become consciously aware that your thumb is now hurt .
But the situation , of course , in the human body is far more complicated than that .
Instead of it being the case that that junction box in the spinal cord is just simple where one nerve connects with the next nerve by releasing these little brown packets of chemical information called neurotransmitters in a linear one - on - one fashion , in fact , what happens is the neurotransmitters spill out in three dimensions  -  -  laterally , vertically , up and down in the spinal cord  -  -  and they start interacting with other adjacent cells .
These cells , called glial cells , were once thought to be unimportant structural elements of the spinal cord that did nothing more than hold all the important things together , like the nerves .
But it turns out the glial cells have a vital role in the modulation , amplification and , in the case of pain , the distortion of sensory experiences .
These glial cells become activated .
Their DNA starts to synthesize new proteins , which spill out and interact with adjacent nerves , and they start releasing their neurotransmitters , and those neurotransmitters spill out and activate adjacent glial cells , and so on and so forth , until what we have is a positive feedback loop .
Its almost as if somebody came into your home and rewired your walls so that the next time you turned on the light switch , the toilet flushed three doors down , or your dishwasher went on , or your computer monitor turned off .
Thats crazy , but thats , in fact , what happens with chronic pain .
And thats why pain becomes its own disease .
The nervous system has plasticity .
It changes , and it morphs in response to stimuli .
Well , what do we do about that ?
What can we do in a case like Chandlers ?
We treat these patients in a rather crude fashion at this point in time .
We treat them with symptom - modifying drugs  -  -  painkillers  -  -  which are , frankly , not very effective for this kind of pain .
We take nerves that are noisy and active that should be quiet , and we put them to sleep with local anesthetics .
And most importantly , what we do is we use a rigorous , and often uncomfortable , process of physical therapy and occupational therapy to retrain the nerves in the nervous system to respond normally to the activities and sensory experiences that are part of everyday life .
And we support all of that with an intensive psychotherapy program to address the despondency , despair and depression that always accompanies severe , chronic pain .
Its successful , as you can see from this video of Chandler , who , two months after we first met her , is now doings a back flip .
And I had lunch with her yesterday because shes a college student studying dance at Long Beach here , and shes doing absolutely fantastic .
But the future is actually even brighter .
The future holds the promise that new drugs will be developed that are not symptom - modifying drugs that simply mask the problem , as we have now , but that will be disease - modifying drugs that will actually go right to the root of the problem and attack those glial cells , or those pernicious proteins that the glial cells elaborate , that spill over and cause this central nervous system wind - up , or plasticity , that so is capable of distorting and amplifying the sensory experience that we call pain .
So I have hope that in the future , the prophetic words of George Carlin will be realized , who said ,  My philosophy : No pain , no pain . 
Thank you very much .
Bruce Aylward : How well stop polio for good
Polio is almost completely eradicated . But as Bruce Aylward says : Almost isnt good enough with a disease this terrifying . Aylward lays out the plan to continue the scientific miracle that ended polio in most of the world  -  -  and to snuff it out everywhere , forever .
I want to share with you over the next 18 minutes a pretty incredible idea .
Actually , its a really big idea .
But to get us started , I want to ask if everyone could just close your eyes for two seconds and try and think of a technology or a bit of science that you think has changed the world .
Now I bet , in this audience , youre thinking of some really incredible technology , some stuff that I havent even heard of , Im absolutely sure .
But Im also sure , pretty sure , that absolutely nobody is thinking of this .
This is a polio vaccine .
And its a great thing actually that nobodys had to think about it here today because it means that we can take this for granted .
This is a great technology .
We can take it completely for granted .
But it wasnt always that way .
Even here in California , if we were to go back just a few years , it was a very different story .
People were terrified of this disease .
They were terrified of polio , and it would cause public panic .
And it was because of scenes like this .
In this scene , people are living in an iron lung .
These are people who were perfectly healthy two or three days before , and then two days later , they can no longer breathe , and this polio virus has paralyzed not only their arms and their legs , but also their breathing muscles .
And they were going to spend the rest of their lives , usually , in this iron lung to breathe for them .
This disease was terrifying .
There was no cure , and there was no vaccine .
The disease was so terrifying that the president of the United States launched an extraordinary national effort to find a way to stop it .
Twenty years later , they succeeded and developed the polio vaccine .
It was hailed as a scientific miracle in the late 1950s .
Finally , a vaccine that could stop this awful disease , and here in the United States it had an incredible impact .
As you can see , the virus stopped , and it stopped very , very fast .
But this wasnt the case everywhere in the world .
And it happened so fast in the United States , however , that even just last month Jon Stewart said this : Jon Stewart : Where is polio still active ?
Because I thought that had been eradicated in the way that smallpox had been eradicated .
Bruce Aylward : Oops . Jon , polios almost been eradicated .
But the reality is that polio still exists today .
We made this map for Jon to try to show him exactly where polio still exists .
This is the picture .
Theres not very much left in the world .
But the reason theres not very much left is because theres been an extraordinary public / private partnership working behind the scenes , almost unknown , Im sure to most of you here today .
Its been working for 20 years to try and eradicate this disease , and its got it down to these few cases that you can see here on this graphic .
But just last year , we had an incredible shock and realized that almost just isnt good enough with a virus like polio .
And this is the reason : in two countries that hadnt had this disease for more than probably a decade , on opposite sides of the globe , there was suddenly terrible polio outbreaks .
Hundreds of people were paralyzed .
Hundreds of people died  -  -  children as well as adults .
And in both cases , we were able to use genetic sequencing to look at the polio viruses , and we could tell these viruses were not from these countries .
They had come from thousands of miles away .
And in one case , it originated on another continent .
And not only that , but when they came into these countries , then they got on commercial jetliners probably and they traveled even farther to other places like Russia , where , for the first time in over a decade last year , children were crippled and paralyzed by a disease that they had not seen for years .
Now all of these outbreaks that I just showed you , these are under control now , and it looks like theyll probably stop very , very quickly .
But the message was very clear .
Polio is still a devastating , explosive disease .
Its just happening in another part of the world .
And our big idea is that the scientific miracle of this decade should be the complete eradication of poliomyelitis .
So I want to tell you a little bit about what this partnership , the Polio Partnership , is trying to do .
Were not trying to control polio .
Were not trying to get it down to just a few cases , because this disease is like a root fire ; it can explode again if you dont snuff it out completely .
So what were looking for is a permanent solution .
We want a world in which every child , just like you guys , can take for granted a polio - free world .
So were looking for a permanent solution , and this is where we get lucky .
This is one of the very few viruses in the world where there are big enough cracks in its armor that we can try to do something truly extraordinary .
This virus can only survive in people .
It cant live for a very long time in people .
It doesnt survive in the environment hardly at all .
And weve got pretty good vaccines , as Ive just showed you .
So we are trying to wipe out this virus completely .
What the polio eradication program is trying to do is to kill the virus itself that causes polio everywhere on Earth .
Now we dont have a great track record when it comes to doing something like this , to eradicating diseases .
Its been tried six times in the last century , and its been successful exactly once .
And this is because disease eradication , its still the venture capital of public health .
The risks are massive , but the pay - off  -  -  economic , humanitarian , motivational  -  -  its absolutely huge .
One congressman here in the United States thinks that the entire investment that the U.S . put into smallpox eradication pays itself off every 26 days  -  -  in foregone treatment costs and vaccination costs .
And if we can finish polio eradication , the poorest countries in the world are going to save over 50 billion dollars in the next 25 years alone .
So those are the kind of stakes that were after .
But smallpox eradication was hard ; it was very , very hard .
And polio eradication , in many ways , is even tougher , and theres a few reasons for that .
The first is that , when we started trying to eradicate polio about 20 years ago , more than twice as many countries were infected than had been when we started off with smallpox .
And there were more than 10 times as many people living in these countries .
So it was a massive effort .
The second challenge we had was  -  -  in contrast to the smallpox vaccine , which was very stable , and a single dose protected you for life  -  -  the polio vaccine is incredibly fragile .
It deteriorates so quickly in the tropics that weve had to put this special vaccine monitor on every single vial so that it will change very quickly when its exposed to too much heat , and we can tell that its not a good vaccine to use on a child  -  -  its not potent ; its not going to protect them .
Even then , kids need many doses of the vaccine .
But the third challenge we have  -  -  and probably even bigger one , the biggest challenge  -  -  is that , in contrast to smallpox where you could always see your enemy  -  -  every single person almost who was infected with smallpox had this telltale rash .
So you could get around the disease ; you could vaccinate around the disease and cut it off .
With polio its almost completely different .
The vast majority of people who are infected with the polio virus show absolutely no sign of the disease .
So you cant see the enemy most of the time , and as a result , weve needed a very different approach to eradicate polio than what was done with smallpox .
Weve had to create one of the largest social movements in history .
Theres over 10 million people , probably 20 million people , largely volunteers , who have been working over the last 20 years in what has now been called the largest internationally - coordinated operation in peacetime .
These people , these 20 million people , vaccinate over 500 million children every single year , multiple times at the peak of our operation .
Now giving the polio vaccine is simple .
Its just two drops , like that .
But reaching 500 million people is much , much tougher .
And these vaccinators , these volunteers , they have got to dive headlong into some of the toughest , densest urban slums in the world .
Theyve got to trek under sweltering suns to some of the most remote , difficult to reach places in the world .
And they also have to dodge bullets , because we have got to operate during shaky cease - fires and truces to try and vaccinate children , even in areas affected by conflict .
One reporter who was watching our program in Somalia about five years ago  -  -  a place which has eradicated polio , not once , but twice , because they got reinfected .
He was sitting outside of the road , watching one of these polio campaigns unfold , and a few months later he wrote :  This is foreign aid at its most heroic . 
And these heroes , they come from every walk of life , all sorts of backgrounds .
But one of the most extraordinary is Rotary International .
This is a group whose million - strong army of volunteers have been working to eradicate polio for over 20 years .
Theyre right at the center of the whole thing .
Now it took years to build up the infrastructure for polio eradication  -  -  more than 15 years , much longer than it should have  -  -  but once it was built , the results were striking .
Within a couple of years , every country that started polio eradication rapidly eradicated all three of their polio viruses , with the exception of four countries that you see here .
And in each of those , it was only part of the country .
And then , by 1999 , one of the three polio viruses that we were trying to eradicate had been completely eradicated worldwide  -  -  proof of concept .
And then today , theres been a 99 percent reduction  -  -  greater than 99 percent reduction  -  -  in the number of children who are being paralyzed by this awful disease .
When we started , over 20 years ago , 1,000 children were being paralyzed every single day by this virus .
Last year , it was 1,000 .
And at the same time , the polio eradication program has been working to help with a lot of other areas .
Its been working to help control pandemic flu , SARS for example .
Its also tried to save children by doing other things  -  -  giving vitamin A drops , giving measles shots , giving bed nets against malaria even during some of these campaigns .
But the most exciting thing that the polio eradication program has been doing has been to force us , the international community , to reach every single child , every single community , the most vulnerable people in the world , with the most basic of health services , irrespective of geography , poverty , culture and even conflict .
So things were looking very exciting , and then about five years ago , this virus , this ancient virus , started to fight back .
The first problem we ran into was that , in these last four countries , the strongholds of this virus , we just couldnt seem to get the virus rooted out .
And then to make the matters even worse , the virus started to spread out of these four places , especially northern India and northern Nigeria , into much of Africa , Asia , and even into Europe , causing horrific outbreaks in places that had not seen this disease for decades .
And then , in one of the most important , tenacious and toughest reservoirs of the polio virus in the world , we found that our vaccine was working half as well as it should have .
In conditions like this , the vaccine just couldnt get the grip it needed to in the guts of these children and protect them the way that it needed to .
Now at that time , there was a great , as you can imagine , frustration  -  -  lets call it frustration  -  -  it started to grow very , very quickly .
And all of a sudden , some very important voices in the world of public health started to say ,  Hang on .
We should abandon this idea of eradication .
Lets settle for control  -  -  thats good enough . 
Now as seductive as the idea of control sounds , its a false premise .
The brutal truth is , if we dont have the will or the skill , or even the money that we need to reach children , the most vulnerable children in the world , with something as simple as an oral polio vaccine , then pretty soon , more than 200,000 children are again going to be paralyzed by this disease every single year .
Theres absolutely no question .
These are children like Umar .
Umar is seven years old , and hes from northern Nigeria .
He lives in a family home there with his eight brothers and sisters .
Umar also has polio .
Umar was paralyzed for life .
His right leg was paralyzed in 2004 .
This leg , his right leg , now takes an awful beating because he has to half - crawl , because its faster to move that way to keep up with his friends , keep up with his brothers and sisters , than to get up on his crutches and walk .
But Umar is a fantastic student . Hes an incredible kid .
As you probably cant see the detail here , but this is his report card , and youll see , hes got perfect scores .
He got 100 percent in all the important things , like nursery rhymes , for example there .
But you know Id love to be able to tell you that Umar is a typical kid with polio these days , but its not true .
Umar is an exceptional kid in exceptional circumstances .
The reality of polio today is something very different .
Polio strikes the poorest communities in the world .
It leaves their children paralyzed , and it drags their families deeper into poverty , because theyre desperately searching and theyre desperately spending the little bit of savings that they have , trying in vain to find a cure for their children .
We think children deserve better .
And so when the going got really tough in the polio eradication program about two years ago , when people were saying ,  We should call it off ,  the Polio Partnership decided to buckle down once again and try and find innovative new solutions , new ways to get to the children that we were missing again and again .
In northern India , we started mapping the cases using satellite imaging like this , so that we could guide our investments and vaccinator shelters , so we could get to the millions of children on the Koshi River basin where there are no other health services .
In northern Nigeria , the political leaders and the traditional Muslim leaders , they got directly involved in the program to help solve the problems of logistics and community confidence .
And now theyve even started using these devices  -  -  speaking of cool technology  -  -  these little devices , little GIS trackers like this , which they put into the vaccine carriers of their vaccinators .
And then they can track them , and at the end of the day , they look and see , did these guys get every single street , every single house .
This is the kind of commitment now were seeing to try and reach all of the children weve been missing .
And in Afghanistan , were trying new approaches  -  -  access negotiators .
Were working closely with the International Committee of the Red Cross to ensure that we can reach every child .
But as we tried these extraordinary things , as people went to this trouble to try and rework their tactics , we went back to the vaccine  -  -  its a 50 - year - old vaccine  -  -  and we thought , surely we can make a better vaccine , so that when they finally get to these kids , we can have a better bang for our buck .
And this started an incredible collaboration with industry , and within six months , we were testing a new polio vaccine that targeted , just two years ago , the last two types of polio in the world .
Now June the ninth , 2009 , we got the first results from the first trial with this vaccine , and it turned out to be a game - changer .
The new vaccine had twice the impact on these last couple of viruses as the old vaccine had , and we immediately started using this .
Well , in a couple of months we had to get it out of production .
And it started rolling off the production lines and into the mouths of children around the world .
And we didnt start with the easy places .
The first place this vaccine was used was in southern Afghanistan , because its in places like that where kids are going to benefit the most from technologies like this .
Now here at TED , over the last couple of days , Ive seen people challenging the audience again and again to believe in the impossible .
So this morning at about seven oclock , I decided that wed try to drive Chris and the production crew here berserk by downloading all of our data from India again , so that you could see something thats just unfolding today , which proves that the impossible is possible .
And only two years ago , people were saying that this is impossible .
Now remember , northern India is the perfect storm when it comes to polio .
Over 500,000 children are born in the two states that have never stopped polio  -  -  Uttar Pradesh and Bihar  -  -  500,000 children every single month .
Sanitation is terrible , and our old vaccine , you remember , worked half as well as it should have .
And yet , the impossible is happening .
Today marks exactly six months  -  -  and for the first time in history , not a single child has been paralyzed in Uttar Pradesh or Bihar .
Indias not unique .
In Umars home country of Nigeria , a 95 percent reduction in the number of children paralyzed by polio last year .
And in the last six months , weve had less places reinfected by polio than at any other time in history .
Ladies and gentlemen , with a combination of smart people , smart technology and smart investments , polio can now be eradicated anywhere .
We have major challenges , you can imagine , to finish this job , but as youve also seen , its doable , it has great secondary benefits , and polio eradication is a great buy .
And as long as any child anywhere is paralyzed by this virus , its a stark reminder that we are failing , as a society , to reach children with the most basic of services .
And for that reason , polio eradication : its the ultimate in equity and its the ultimate in social justice .
The huge social movement thats been involved in polio eradication is ready to do way more for these children .
Its ready to reach them with bed nets , with other things .
But capitalizing on their enthusiasm , capitalizing on their energy means finishing the job that they started 20 years ago .
Finishing polio is a smart thing to do , and its the right thing to do .
Now were in tough times economically .
But as David Cameron of the United Kingdom said about a month ago when he was talking about polio ,  Theres never a wrong time to do the right thing . 
Finishing polio eradication is the right thing to do .
And we are at a crossroads right now in this great effort over the last 20 years .
We have a new vaccine , we have new resolve , and we have new tactics .
We have the chance to write an entirely new polio - free chapter in human history .
But if we blink now , we will lose forever the chance to eradicate an ancient disease .
Heres a great idea to spread : End polio now .
Help us tell the story .
Help us build the momentum so that very soon every child , every parent everywhere can also take for granted a polio - free life forever .
Thank you .
Bill Gates : Well Bruce , where do you think the toughest places are going to be ?
Where would you say we need to be the smartest ?
B The four places where you saw , that weve never stopped  -  -  northern Nigeria , northern India , the southern corner of Afghanistan and bordering areas of Pakistan  -  -  theyre going to be the toughest .
But the interesting thing is , of those three , Indias looking real good , as you just saw in the data .
And Afghanistan , Afghanistan , we think has probably stopped polio repeatedly .
It keeps getting reinfected .
So the tough ones : going to get the top of Nigeria finished and getting Pakistan finished .
Theyre going to be the tough ones .
Now what about the money ?
Give us a sense of how much the campaign costs a year .
And is it easy to raise that money ?
And whats it going to be like the next couple of years ?
B Its interesting .
We spend right now about 750 million to 800 million dollars a year .
Thats what it costs to reach 500 million children .
It sounds like a lot of money ; it is a lot of money .
But when youre reaching 500 million children multiple times  -  -  20 , 30 cents to reach a child  -  -  thats not very much money .
But right now we dont have enough of that .
We have a big gap in that money . Were cutting corners , and every time we cut corners , more places get infected that shouldnt have , and it just slows us down .
And that great buy costs us a little bit more .
Well , hopefully well get the word out , and the governments will keep their generosity up .
So good luck . Were all in this with you .
Thank you .
Frank Warren : Half a million secrets
 Secrets can take many forms  -  -  they can be shocking , or silly , or soulful .  Frank Warren , the founder of PostSecret.com , shares some of the half - million secrets that strangers have mailed him on postcards .
Hi , my name is Frank , and I collect secrets .
It all started with a crazy idea in November of 2004 .
I printed up 3,000 self - addressed postcards , just like this .
They were blank on one side , and on the other side I listed some simple instructions .
I asked people to anonymously share an artful secret theyd never told anyone before .
And I handed out these postcards randomly on the streets of Washington , D.C . , not knowing what to expect .
But soon the idea began spreading virally .
People began to buy their own postcards and make their own postcards .
I started receiving secrets in my home mailbox , not just with postmarks from Washington , D.C . , but from Texas , California , Vancouver , New Zealand , Iraq .
Soon my crazy idea didnt seem so crazy .
PostSecret.com is the most visited advertisement - free blog in the world .
And this is my postcard collection today .
You can see my wife struggling to stack a brick of postcards on a pyramid of over a half - million secrets .
What Id like to do now is share with you a very special handful of secrets from that collection , starting with this one .
 I found these stamps as a child , and I have been waiting all my life to have someone to send them to .
I never did have someone . 
Secrets can take many forms .
They can be shocking or silly or soulful .
They can connect us to our deepest humanity or with people well never meet .
Maybe one of you sent this one in .
I dont know .
This one does a great job of demonstrating the creativity that people have when they make and mail me a postcard .
This one obviously was made out of half a Starbucks cup with a stamp and my home address written on the other side .
 Dear Birthmother , I have great parents .
Ive found love . Im happy . 
Secrets can remind us of the countless human dramas , of frailty and heroism , playing out silently in the lives of people all around us even now .
 Everyone who knew me before 9 / 11 believes Im dead . 
 I used to work with a bunch of uptight religious people , so sometimes I didnt wear panties , and just had a big smile and chuckled to myself . 
This next one takes a little explanation before I share it with you .
I love to speak on college campuses and share secrets and the stories with students .
And sometimes afterwards Ill stick around and sign books and take photos with students .
And this next postcard was made out of one of those photos .
And I should also mention that , just like today , at that PostSecret event , I was using a wireless microphone .
 Your mic wasnt off during sound check .
We all heard you pee . 
This was really embarrassing when it happened , until I realized it could have been worse .
Right . You know what Im saying .
 Inside this envelope is the ripped up remains of a suicide note I didnt use .
I feel like the happiest person on Earth   One of these men is the father of my son .
He pays me a lot to keep it a secret . 
 That Saturday when you wondered where I was , well , I was getting your ring .
Its in my pocket right now . 
I had this postcard posted on the PostSecret blog two years ago on Valentines Day .
It was the very bottom , the last secret in the long column .
And it hadnt been up for more than a couple hours before I received this exuberant email from the guy who mailed me this postcard .
And he said ,  Frank , Ive got to share with you this story that just played out in my life . 
He said ,  My knees are still shaking . 
He said ,  For three years , my girlfriend and I , weve made it this Sunday morning ritual to visit the PostSecret blog together and read the secrets out loud .
I read some to her , she reads some to me . 
He says ,  Its really brought us closer together through the years .
And so when I discovered that you had posted my surprise proposal to my girlfriend at the very bottom , I was beside myself .
And I tried to act calm , not to give anything away .
And just like every Sunday , we started reading the secrets out loud to each other . 
He said ,  But this time it seemed like it was taking her forever to get through each one . 
But she finally did .
She got to that bottom secret , his proposal to her .
And he said ,  She read it once and then she read it again . 
And she turned to him and said ,  Is that our cat ? 
And when she saw him , he was down on one knee , he had the ring out .
He popped the question , she said yes . It was a very happy ending .
So I emailed him back and I said ,  Please share with me an image , something , that I can share with the whole PostSecret community and let everyone know your fairy tale ending . 
And he emailed me this picture .
 I found your camera at Lollapalooza this summer .
I finally got the pictures developed and Id love to give them to you . 
This picture never got returned back to the people who lost it , but this secret has impacted many lives , starting with a student up in Canada named Matty .
Matty was inspired by that secret to start his own website , a website called IFoundYourCamera .
Matty invites people to mail him digital cameras that theyve found , memory sticks that have been lost with orphan photos .
And Matty takes the pictures off these cameras and posts them on his website every week .
And people come to visit to see if they can identify a picture theyve lost or help somebody else get the photos back to them that they might be desperately searching for .
This ones my favorite .
Matty has found this ingenious way to leverage the kindness of strangers .
And it might seem like a simple idea , and it is , but the impact it can have on peoples lives can be huge .
Matty shared with me an emotional email he received from the mother in that picture .
 Thats me , my husband and son .
The other pictures are of my very ill grandmother .
Thank you for making your site .
These pictures mean more to me than you know .
My sons birth is on this camera .
He turns four tomorrow . 
Every picture that you see there and thousands of others have been returned back to the person who lost it  -  -  sometimes crossing oceans , sometimes going through language barriers .
This is the last postcard I have to share with you today .
 When people I love leave voicemails on my phone I always save them in case they die tomorrow and I have no other way of hearing their voice ever again . 
When I posted this secret , dozens of people sent voicemail messages from their phones , sometimes ones theyd been keeping for years , messages from family or friends who had died .
They said that by preserving those voices and sharing them , it helped them keep the spirit of their loved ones alive .
One young girl posted the last message she ever heard from her grandmother .
Secrets can take many forms .
They can be shocking or silly or soulful .
They can connect us with our deepest humanity or with people well never meet again .
Voicemail recording : First saved voice message .
Its somebodys birthday today Somebodys birthday today The candles are lighted on somebodys cake And were all invited for somebodys sake Youre 21 years old today .
Have a real happy birthday , and I love you .
Ill say bye for now .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Frank , that was beautiful , so touching .
Have you ever sent yourself a postcard ?
Have you ever sent in a secret to PostSecret ?
I have one of my own secrets in every book .
I think in some ways , the reason I started the project , even though I didnt know it at the time , was because I was struggling with my own secrets .
And it was through crowd - sourcing , it was through the kindness that strangers were showing me , that I could uncover parts of my past that were haunting me .
And has anyone ever discovered which secret was yours in the book ?
Has anyone in your life been able to tell ?
Sometimes I share that information , yeah .
Tony Porter : A call to men
At TEDWomen , Tony Porter makes a call to men everywhere : Dont  act like a man .  Telling powerful stories from his own life , he shows how this mentality , drummed into so many men and boys , can lead men to disrespect , mistreat and abuse women and each other . His solution : Break free of the  man box . 
I grew up in New York City , between Harlem and the Bronx .
Growing up as a boy , we were taught that men had to be tough , had to be strong , had to be courageous , dominating  -  -  no pain , no emotions , with the exception of anger  -  -  and definitely no fear ; that men are in charge , which means women are not ; that men lead , and you should just follow and do what we say ; that men are superior ; women are inferior ; that men are strong ; women are weak ; that women are of less value , property of men , and objects , particularly sexual objects .
Ive later come to know that to be the collective socialization of men , better known as the  man box . 
See this man box has in it all the ingredients of how we define what it means to be a man .
Now I also want to say , without a doubt , there are some wonderful , wonderful , absolutely wonderful things about being a man .
But at the same time , theres some stuff thats just straight up twisted , and we really need to begin to challenge , look at it and really get in the process of deconstructing , redefining , what we come to know as manhood .
This is my two at home , Kendall and Jay .
Theyre 11 and 12 .
Kendalls 15 months older than Jay .
There was a period of time when my wife  -  -  her name is Tammie  -  -  and I , we just got real busy and whip , bam , boom : Kendall and Jay .
And when they were about five and six , four and five , Jay could come to me , come to me crying .
It didnt matter what she was crying about , she could get on my knee , she could snot my sleeve up , just cry , cry it out .
Daddys got you . Thats all thats important .
Now Kendall on the other hand  -  -  and like I said , hes only 15 months older than her  -  -  hed come to me crying , its like as soon as I would hear him cry , a clock would go off .
I would give the boy probably about 30 seconds , which means , by the time he got to me , I was already saying things like ,  Why are you crying ?
Hold your head up . Look at me .
Explain to me whats wrong .
Tell me whats wrong . I cant understand you .
Why are you crying ? 
And out of my own frustration of my role and responsibility of building him up as a man to fit into these guidelines and these structures that are defining this man box , I would find myself saying things like ,  Just go in your room .
Just go on , go on in your room .
Sit down , get yourself together and come back and talk to me when you can talk to me like a  -  -   what ?
Like a man .
And hes five years old .
And as I grow in life , I would say to myself ,  My God , whats wrong with me ?
What am I doing ? Why would I do this ? 
And I think back .
I think back to my father .
There was a time in my life where we had a very troubled experience in our family .
My brother , Henry , he died tragically when we were teenagers .
We lived in New York City , as I said .
We lived in the Bronx at the time , and the burial was in a place called Long Island , it was about two hours outside of the city .
And as we were preparing to come back from the burial , the cars stopped at the bathroom to let folks take care of themselves before the long ride back to the city .
And the limousine empties out .
My mother , my sister , my auntie , they all get out , but my father and I stayed in the limousine , and no sooner than the women got out , he burst out crying .
He didnt want cry in front of me , but he knew he wasnt going to make it back to the city , and it was better me than to allow himself to express these feelings and emotions in front of the women .
And this is a man who , 10 minutes ago , had just put his teenage son in the ground  -  -  something I just cant even imagine .
The thing that sticks with me the most is that he was apologizing to me for crying in front of me , and at the same time , he was also giving me props , lifting me up , for not crying .
I come to also look at this as this fear that we have as men , this fear that just has us paralyzed , holding us hostage to this man box .
I can remember speaking to a 12 - year - old boy , a football player , and I asked him , I said ,  How would you feel if , in front of all the players , your coach told you you were playing like a girl ? 
Now I expected him to say something like , Id be sad ; Id be mad ; Id be angry , or something like that .
No , the boy said to me  -  -  the boy said to me ,  It would destroy me . 
And I said to myself ,  God , if it would destroy him to be called a girl , what are we then teaching him about girls ? 
It took me back to a time when I was about 12 years old .
I grew up in tenement buildings in the inner city .
At this time were living in the Bronx , and in the building next to where I lived there was a guy named Johnny .
He was about 16 years old , and we were all about 12 years old  -  -  younger guys .
And he was hanging out with all us younger guys .
And this guy , he was up to a lot of no good .
He was the kind of kid who parents would have to wonder ,  What is this 16 - year - old boy doing with these 12 - year - old boys ? 
And he did spend a lot of time up to no good .
He was a troubled kid .
His mother had died from a heroin overdose .
He was being raised by his grandmother .
His father wasnt on the set .
His grandmother had two jobs .
He was home alone a lot .
But Ive got to tell you , we young guys , we looked up to this dude , man .
He was cool . He was fine .
Thats what the sisters said ,  He was fine . 
He was having sex .
We all looked up to him .
So one day , Im out in front of the house doing something  -  -  just playing around , doing something  -  -  I dont know what .
He looks out his window ; he calls me upstairs ; he said ,  Hey Anthony . 
They called me Anthony growing up as a kid .
 Hey Anthony , come on upstairs . 
Johnny call , you go .
So I run right upstairs .
As he opens the door , he says to me ,  Do you want some ? 
Now I immediately knew what he meant .
Because for me growing up at that time , and our relationship with this man box ,  Do you want some ?  meant one of two things : sex or drugs  -  -  and we werent doing drugs .
Now my box , my card , my man box card , was immediately in jeopardy .
Two things : One , I never had sex .
We dont talk about that as men .
You only tell your dearest , closest friend , sworn to secrecy for life , the first time you had sex .
For everybody else , we go around like weve been having sex since we were two .
There aint no first time .
The other thing I couldnt tell him is that I didnt want any .
Thats even worse . Were supposed to always be on the prowl .
Women are objects , especially sexual objects .
Anyway , so I couldnt tell him any of that .
So , like my mother would say , make a long story short , I just simply said to Johnny ,  Yes . 
He told me to go in his room .
I go in his room . On his bed is a girl from the neighborhood named Sheila .
Shes 16 years old .
Shes nude .
Shes what I know today to be mentally ill , higher - functioning at times than others .
We had a whole choice of inappropriate names for her .
Anyway , Johnny had just gotten through having sex with her .
Well actually , he raped her , but he would say he had sex with her .
Because , while Sheila never said no , she also never said yes .
So he was offering me the opportunity to do the same .
So when I go in the room , I close the door .
Folks , Im petrified .
I stand with my back to the door so Johnny cant bust in the room and see that Im not doing anything , and I stand there long enough that I could have actually done something .
So now Im no longer trying to figure out what Im going to do ; Im trying to figure out how Im going to get out of this room .
So in my 12 years of wisdom , I zip my pants down , I walk out into the room , and lo and behold to me , while I was in the room with Sheila , Johnny was back at the window calling guys up .
So now theres a living room full of guys .
It was like the waiting room in the doctors office .
And they asked me how was it , and I say to them ,  It was good ,  and I zip my pants up in front of them , and I head for the door .
Now I say this all with remorse , and I was feeling a tremendous amount of remorse at that time , but I was conflicted , because , while I was feeling remorse , I was excited , because I didnt get caught .
But I knew I felt bad about what was happening .
This fear , getting outside the man box , totally enveloped me .
It was way more important to me , about me and my man box card than about Sheila and what was happening to her .
See collectively , we as men are taught to have less value in women , to view them as property and the objects of men .
We see that as an equation that equals violence against women .
We as men , good men , the large majority of men , we operate on the foundation of this whole collective socialization .
We kind of see ourselves separate , but were very much a part of it .
You see , we have to come to understand that less value , property and objectification is the foundation and the violence cant happen without it .
So were very much a part of the solution as well as the problem .
The center for disease control says that mens violence against women is at epidemic proportions , is the number one health concern for women in this country and abroad .
So quickly , Id like to just say , this is the love of my life , my daughter Jay .
The world I envision for her  -  -  how do I want men to be acting and behaving ?
I need you on board . I need you with me .
I need you working with me and me working with you on how we raise our sons and teach them to be men  -  -  that its okay to not be dominating , that its okay to have feelings and emotions , that its okay to promote equality , that its okay to have women who are just friends and thats it , that its okay to be whole , that my liberation as a man is tied to your liberation as a woman .
I remember asking a nine - year - old boy , I asked a nine - year - old boy ,  What would life be like for you , if you didnt have to adhere to this man box ? 
He said to me ,  I would be free . 
Thank you folks .
Stanley McChrystal : Listen , learn ... then lead
Four - star general Stanley McChrystal shares what he learned about leadership over his decades in the military . How can you build a sense of shared purpose among people of many ages and skill sets ? By listening and learning  -  -  and addressing the possibility of failure .
Ten years ago , on a Tuesday morning , I conducted a parachute jump at Fort Bragg , North Carolina .
It was a routine training jump , like many more Id done since I became a paratrooper 27 years before .
We went down to the airfield early because this is the Army and you always go early .
You do some routine refresher training , and then you go to put on your parachute and a buddy helps you .
And you put on the T - 10 parachute .
And youre very careful how you put the straps , particularly the leg straps because they go between your legs .
And then you put on your reserve , and then you put on your heavy rucksack .
And then a jumpmaster comes , and hes an experienced NCO in parachute operations .
He checks you out , he grabs your adjusting straps and he tightens everything so that your chest is crushed , your shoulders are crushed down , and , of course , hes tightened so your voice goes up a couple octaves as well .
Then you sit down , and you wait a little while , because this is the Army .
Then you load the aircraft , and then you stand up and you get on , and you kind of lumber to the aircraft like this , in a line of people , and you sit down on canvas seats on either side of the aircraft .
And you wait a little bit longer , because this is the Air Force teaching the Army how to wait .
Then you take off .
And its painful enough now  -  -  and I think its designed this way  -  -  its painful enough so you want to jump .
You didnt really want to jump , but you want out .
So you get in the aircraft , youre flying along , and at 20 minutes out , these jumpmasters start giving you commands .
They give 20 minutes  -  -  thats a time warning .
You sit there , OK .
Then they give you 10 minutes .
And of course , youre responding with all of these .
And thats to boost everybodys confidence , to show that youre not scared .
Then they give you ,  Get ready . 
Then they go ,  Outboard personnel , stand up . 
If youre an outboard personnel , now you stand up .
If youre an inboard personnel , stand up .
And then you hook up , and you hook up your static line .
And at that point , you think ,  Hey , guess what ?
Im probably going to jump .
Theres no way to get out of this at this point . 
You go through some additional checks , and then they open the door .
And this was that Tuesday morning in September , and it was pretty nice outside .
So nice air comes flowing in .
The jumpmasters start to check the door .
And then when its time to go , a green light goes and the jumpmaster goes ,  Go . 
The first guy goes , and youre just in line , and you just kind of lumber to the door .
Jump is a misnomer ; you fall .
You fall outside the door , youre caught in the slipstream .
The first thing you do is lock into a tight body position  -  -  head down in your chest , your arms extended , put over your reserve parachute .
You do that because , 27 years before , an airborne sergeant had taught me to do that .
I have no idea whether it makes any difference , but he seemed to make sense , and I wasnt going to test the hypothesis that hed be wrong .
And then you wait for the opening shock for your parachute to open .
If you dont get an opening shock , you dont get a parachute  -  -  youve got a whole new problem set .
But typically you do ; typically it opens .
And of course , if your leg straps arent set right , at that point you get another little thrill .
Boom .
So then you look around , youre under a canopy and you say ,  This is good . 
Now you prepare for the inevitable .
You are going to hit the ground .
You cant delay that much .
And you really cant decide where you hit very much , because they pretend you can steer , but youre being delivered .
So you look around , where youre going to land , you try to make yourself ready .
And then as you get close , you lower your rucksack below you on a lowering line , so that its not on you when you land , and you prepare to do a parachute - landing fall .
Now the Army teaches you to do five points of performance  -  -  the toes of your feet , your calves , your thighs , your buttocks and your push - up muscles .
Its this elegant little land , twist and roll .
And thats not going to hurt .
In 30 - some years of jumping , I never did one .
I always landed like a watermelon out of a third floor window .
And as soon as I hit , the first thing I did is Id see if Id broken anything that I needed .
Id shake my head , and Id ask myself the eternal question :  Why didnt I go into banking ? 
And Id look around , and then Id see another paratrooper , a young guy or girl , and theyd have pulled out their M4 carbine and theyd be picking up their equipment .
Theyd be doing everything that we had taught them .
And I realized that , if they had to go into combat , they would do what we had taught them and they would follow leaders .
And I realized that , if they came out of combat , it would be because we led them well .
And I was hooked again on the importance of what I did .
So now I do that Tuesday morning jump , but its not any jump  -  -  that was September 11th , 2001 .
And when we took off from the airfield , America was at peace .
When we landed on the drop - zone , everything had changed .
And what we thought about the possibility of those young soldiers going into combat as being theoretical was now very , very real  -  -  and leadership seemed important .
But things had changed ; I was a 46 - year - old brigadier general .
Id been successful , but things changed so much that I was going to have to make some significant changes , and on that morning , I didnt know it .
I was raised with traditional stories of leadership : Robert E . Lee , John Buford at Gettysburg .
And I also was raised with personal examples of leadership .
This was my father in Vietnam .
And I was raised to believe that soldiers were strong and wise and brave and faithful ; they didnt lie , cheat , steal or abandon their comrades .
And I still believe real leaders are like that .
But in my first 25 years of career , I had a bunch of different experiences .
One of my first battalion commanders , I worked in his battalion for 18 months and the only conversation he ever had with Lt . McChrystal was at mile 18 of a 25 - mile road march , and he chewed my ass for about 40 seconds .
And Im not sure that was real interaction .
But then a couple of years later , when I was a company commander , I went out to the National Training Center .
And we did an operation , and my company did a dawn attack  -  -  you know , the classic dawn attack : you prepare all night , move to the line of departure .
And I had an armored organization at that point .
We move forward , and we get wiped out  -  -  I mean , wiped out immediately .
The enemy didnt break a sweat doing it .
And after the battle , they bring this mobile theater and they do what they call an  after action review  to teach you what youve done wrong .
Sort of leadership by humiliation .
They put a big screen up , and they take you through everything :  and then you didnt do this , and you didnt do this , etc . 
I walked out feeling as low as a snakes belly in a wagon rut .
And I saw my battalion commander , because I had let him down .
And I went up to apologize to him , and he said ,  Stanley , I thought you did great . 
And in one sentence , he lifted me , put me back on my feet , and taught me that leaders can let you fail and yet not let you be a failure .
When 9 / 11 came , 46 - year - old Brig . Gen . McChrystal sees a whole new world .
First , the things that are obvious , that youre familiar with : the environment changed  -  -  the speed , the scrutiny , the sensitivity of everything now is so fast , sometimes it evolves faster than people have time to really reflect on it .
But everything we do is in a different context .
More importantly , the force that I led was spread over more than 20 countries .
And instead of being able to get all the key leaders for a decision together in a single room and look them in the eye and build their confidence and get trust from them , Im now leading a force thats dispersed , and Ive got to use other techniques .
Ive got to use video teleconferences , Ive got to use chat , Ive got to use everything I can , not just for communication , but for leadership .
A 22 - year - old individual operating alone , thousands of miles from me , has got to communicate to me with confidence .
I have to have trust in them and vice versa .
And I also have to build their faith .
And thats a new kind of leadership for me .
We had one operation where we had to coordinate it from multiple locations .
An emerging opportunity came  -  -  didnt have time to get everybody together .
So we had to get complex intelligence together , we had to line up the ability to act .
It was sensitive , we had to go up the chain of command , convince them that this was the right thing to do and do all of this on electronic medium .
We failed .
The mission didnt work .
And so now what we had to do is I had to reach out to try to rebuild the trust of that force , rebuild their confidence  -  -  me and them , and them and me , and our seniors and us as a force  -  -  all without the ability to put a hand on a shoulder .
Entirely new requirement .
Also , the people had changed .
You probably think that the force that I led was all steely - eyed commandos with big knuckle fists carrying exotic weapons .
In reality , much of the force I led looked exactly like you .
It was men , women , young , old  -  -  not just from military ; from different organizations , many of them detailed to us just from a handshake .
And so instead of giving orders , youre now building consensus and youre building a sense of shared purpose .
Probably the biggest change was understanding that the generational difference , the ages , had changed so much .
I went down to be with a Ranger platoon on an operation in Afghanistan , and on that operation , a sergeant in the platoon had lost about half his arm throwing a Taliban hand grenade back at the enemy after it had landed in his fire team .
We talked about the operation , and then at the end I did what I often do with a force like that .
I asked ,  Where were you on 9 / 11 ? 
And one young Ranger in the back  -  -  his hairs tousled and his face is red and windblown from being in combat in the cold Afghan wind  -  -  he said ,  Sir , I was in the sixth grade . 
And it reminded me that were operating a force that must have shared purpose and shared consciousness , and yet he has different experiences , in many cases a different vocabulary , a completely different skill set in terms of digital media than I do and many of the other senior leaders .
And yet , we need to have that shared sense .
It also produced something which I call an inversion of expertise , because we had so many changes at the lower levels in technology and tactics and whatnot , that suddenly the things that we grew up doing wasnt what the force was doing anymore .
So how does a leader stay credible and legitimate when they havent done what the people youre leading are doing ?
And its a brand new leadership challenge .
And it forced me to become a lot more transparent , a lot more willing to listen , a lot more willing to be reverse - mentored from lower .
And yet , again , youre not all in one room .
Then another thing .
Theres an effect on you and on your leaders .
Theres an impact , its cumulative .
You dont reset , or recharge your battery every time .
I stood in front of a screen one night in Iraq with one of my senior officers and we watched a firefight from one of our forces .
And I remembered his son was in our force .
And I said ,  John , wheres your son ? And how is he ? 
And he said ,  Sir , hes fine . Thanks for asking . 
I said ,  Where is he now ? 
And he pointed at the screen , he said ,  Hes in that firefight . 
Think about watching your brother , father , daughter , son , wife in a firefight in real time and you cant do anything about it .
Think about knowing that over time .
And its a new cumulative pressure on leaders .
And you have to watch and take care of each other .
I probably learned the most about relationships .
I learned they are the sinew which hold the force together .
I grew up much of my career in the Ranger regiment .
And every morning in the Ranger regiment , every Ranger  -  -  and there are more than 2,000 of them  -  -  says a six - stanza Ranger creed .
You may know one line of it , it says ,  Ill never leave a fallen comrade to fall into the hands of the enemy . 
And its not a mindless mantra , and its not a poem .
Its a promise .
Every Ranger promises every other Ranger ,  No matter what happens , no matter what it costs me , if you need me , Im coming . 
And every Ranger gets that same promise from every other Ranger .
Think about it . Its extraordinarily powerful .
Its probably more powerful than marriage vows .
And theyve lived up to it , which gives it special power .
And so the organizational relationship that bonds them is just amazing .
And I learned personal relationships were more important than ever .
We were in a difficult operation in Afghanistan in 2007 , and an old friend of mine , that I had spent many years at various points of my career with  -  -  godfather to one of their kids  -  -  he sent me a note , just in an envelope , that had a quote from Sherman to Grant that said ,  I knew if I ever got in a tight spot , that you would come , if alive . 
And having that kind of relationship , for me , turned out to be critical at many points in my career .
And I learned that you have to give that in this environment , because its tough .
That was my journey .
I hope its not over .
I came to believe that a leader isnt good because theyre right ; theyre good because theyre willing to learn and to trust .
This isnt easy stuff .
Its not like that electronic abs machine where , 15 minutes a month , you get washboard abs .
And it isnt always fair .
You can get knocked down , and it hurts and it leaves scars .
But if youre a leader , the people youve counted on will help you up .
And if youre a leader , the people who count on you need you on your feet .
Thank you .
Arunachalam Muruganantham : How I started a sanitary napkin revolution !
When he realized his wife had to choose between buying family meals and buying her monthly  supplies ,  Arunachalam Muruganantham vowed to help her solve the problem of the sanitary pad . His research got very very personal  -  -  and led him to a powerful business model .
So I tried to do a small good thing for my wife .
It makes me to stand here , the fame , the money I got out of it .
So what I did , Id gone back to my early marriage days .
What you did in the early marriage days , you tried to impress your wife . I did the same .
On that occasion , I found my wife carrying something like this .
I saw .  What is that ?  I asked .
My wife replied ,  None of your business . 
Then , being her husband , I ran behind her and saw she had a nasty rag cloth .
I dont even use that cloth to clean my two - wheeler .
Then I understood this  -  -  adapting that unhygienic method to manage her period days .
Then I immediately asked her , why are you  using  that unhygienic method ?
She replied , I also know about  sanitary pads  , but myself and my sisters , if they start using that , we have to cut our family milk budget .
Then I was shocked . What is the connection between using a sanitary pad and a milk budget ?
And its called affordability .
I tried to impress my new wife by offering her a packet of sanitary pads .
I went to a local shop , I tried to buy her a sanitary pad packet .
That fellow looks left and right , and spreads a newspaper , rolls it into the newspaper , gives it to me like a banned item , something like that .
I dont know why . I did not ask for a condom .
Then I took that pad . I want to see that . What is inside it ?
The very first time , at the age of 29 , that day I am touching the sanitary pad , first ever .
I must know : How many of the guys here have touched a sanitary pad ?
They are not going to touch that , because its not your matter .
Then I thought to myself , white substance , made of cotton  -  -  oh my God , that guy is just using a penny value of raw material  -  -  inside they are selling for pounds , dollars .
Why not make a local sanitary pad for my new wife ?
Thats how all this started , but after making a sanitary pad , where can I check it ?
Its not like I can just check it in the lab .
I need a woman volunteer . Where can I get one in India ?
Even in Bangalore you wont get  one  , in India .
So only problem : the only available victim is my wife .
Then I made a sanitary pad and handed it to Shanti  -  -  my wifes name is Shanti .
 Close your eyes . Whatever I give , it will be not a diamond pendant not a diamond ring , even a chocolate , I will give you a surprise with a lot of tinsel paper rolled up with it .
Close your eyes . 
Because I tried to make it intimate .
Because its an arranged marriage , not a love marriage .
So one day she said , openly , Im not going to support this research .
Then other victims , they got into my sisters .
But even sisters , wives , theyre not ready to support in the research .
Thats why I am always jealous with the saints in India .
They are having a lot of women volunteers around them .
Why I am not getting  any  ?
You know , without them even calling , theyll get a lot of women volunteers .
Then I used , tried to use the medical college girls .
They also refused . Finally , I decide , use sanitary pad myself .
Now I am having a title like the first man to set foot on the moon .
Armstrong . Then Tenzing  and  Hillary , in Everest , like that Muruganantham is the first man wore a sanitary pad across the globe .
I wore a sanitary pad . I filled animal blood in a football bottle , I tied it up here , there is a tube going into my panties , while Im walking , while Im cycling , I made a press , doses of blood will go there .
That makes me bow down to any woman in front of me to give full respect . That five days Ill never forget  -  -  the messy days , the lousy days , that wetness .
My God , its unbelievable .
But here the problem is , one company is making napkin out of cotton . It is working well .
But I am also trying to make sanitary pad with the good cotton . Its not working .
That makes me to want to refuse to continue this research and research and research .
You need first funds .
Not only financial crises , but because of the sanitary pad research , I come through all sorts of problems , including a divorce notice from my wife .
Why is this ? I used medical college girls .
She suspects I am using as a trump card to run behind medical college girls .
Finally , I came to know it is a special cellulose derived from a pinewood , but even after that , you need a multimillion - dollar plant like this to process that material . Again , a stop - up .
Then I spend another four years to create my own machine tools , a simple machine tool like this .
In this machine , any rural woman can apply the same raw materials that they are processing in the multinational plant , anyone can make a world - class napkin at your dining hall .
That is my invention .
So after that , what I did , usually if anyone got a patent or an invention , immediately you want to make , convert into this .
I never did this . I dropped it just like this , because you do this , if anyone runs after money , their life will not  have  any beauty . It is boredom .
A lot of people making a lot of money , billion , billions of dollars accumulating .
Why are they coming for , finally , for philanthropy ?
Why the need for accumulating money , then doing philanthropy ?
What if one decided to start philanthropy from the day one ?
Thats why I am giving this machine only in rural India , for rural women , because in India ,  youll be  surprised , only two percent of women are using sanitary pads . The rest , theyre using a rag cloth , a leaf , husk ,  saw  dust , everything except sanitary pads .
It is the same in the 21st century . Thats why I am going to decide to give this machine only for poor women across India .
So far , 630 installations happened in 23 states in six other countries .
Now Im on my seventh year sustaining against multinational , transnational giants  -  -  makes all MBA students a question mark .
A school dropout from Coimbatore , how he is able to sustaining ?
That makes me a visiting professor and guest lecturer in all IIMs .
Play video one .
Arunachalam Muruganantham : The thing I saw in my wifes hand ,  Why are you using that nasty cloth ? 
She replied immediately ,  I know about napkins , but if I start using napkins , then we have to cut our family milk budget . 
Why not make myself a low - cost napkin ?
So I decided Im going to sell this new machine only for Women Self Help Groups .
That is my idea .
AM : And previously , you need a multimillion investment for machine and all . Now , any rural woman can .
They are performing puja .
: You just think , competing giants , even from Harvard , Oxford , is difficult .
I make a rural woman to compete with multinationals .
Im sustaining on seventh year .
Already 600 installations . What is my mission ?
Im going to make India  into  a 100 - percent - sanitary - napkin - using country in my lifetime .
In this way Im going to provide not less than a million rural employment that Im going to create .
Thats why Im not running after this bloody money .
Im doing something serious .
If you chase a girl , the girl wont like you .
Do your job simply , the girl will chase you .
Like that , I never chased Mahalakshmi .
Mahalakshmi is chasing me , I am keeping in the back pocket .
Not in front pocket . Im a back pocket man .
Thats all . A school dropout saw your problem in the society of not using sanitary pad .
I am becoming a solution provider . Im very happy .
I dont want to make this as a corporate entity .
I want to make this as a local sanitary pad movement across the globe . Thats why I put all the details on public domain like an open software .
Now 110 countries are accessing it . Okay ?
So I classify the people into three : uneducated , little educated , surplus educated .
Little educated , done this . Surplus educated , what are you going to do for the society ?
Thank you very much . Bye !
Stephen Hawking : Questioning the universe
In keeping with the theme of TED2008 , professor Stephen Hawking asks some Big Questions about our universe  -  -  How did the universe begin ? How did life begin ? Are we alone ?  -  -  and discusses how we might go about answering them .
There is nothing bigger or older than the universe .
The questions I would like to talk about are : one , where did we come from ?
How did the universe come into being ?
Are we alone in the universe ?
Is there alien life out there ?
What is the future of the human race ?
Up until the 1920s , everyone thought the universe was essentially static and unchanging in time .
Then it was discovered that the universe was expanding .
Distant galaxies were moving away from us .
This meant they must have been closer together in the past .
If we extrapolate back , we find we must have all been on top of each other about 15 billion years ago .
This was the Big Bang , the beginning of the universe .
But was there anything before the Big Bang ?
If not , what created the universe ?
Why did the universe emerge from the Big Bang the way it did ?
We used to think that the theory of the universe could be divided into two parts .
First , there were the laws like Maxwells equations and general relativity that determined the evolution of the universe , given its state over all of space at one time .
And second , there was no question of the initial state of the universe .
We have made good progress on the first part , and now have the knowledge of the laws of evolution in all but the most extreme conditions .
But until recently , we have had little idea about the initial conditions for the universe .
However , this division into laws of evolution and initial conditions depends on time and space being separate and distinct .
Under extreme conditions , general relativity and quantum theory allow time to behave like another dimension of space .
This removes the distinction between time and space , and means the laws of evolution can also determine the initial state .
The universe can spontaneously create itself out of nothing .
Moreover , we can calculate a probability that the universe was created in different states .
These predictions are in excellent agreement with observations by the WMAP satellite of the cosmic microwave background , which is an imprint of the very early universe .
We think we have solved the mystery of creation .
Maybe we should patent the universe and charge everyone royalties for their existence .
I now turn to the second big question : are we alone , or is there other life in the universe ?
We believe that life arose spontaneously on the Earth , so it must be possible for life to appear on other suitable planets , of which there seem to be a large number in the galaxy .
But we dont know how life first appeared .
We have two pieces of observational evidence on the probability of life appearing .
The first is that we have fossils of algae from 3.5 billion years ago .
The Earth was formed 4.6 billion years ago and was probably too hot for about the first half billion years .
So life appeared on Earth within half a billion years of it being possible , which is short compared to the 10 - billion - year lifetime of a planet of Earth type .
This suggests that a probability of life appearing is reasonably high .
If it was very low , one would have expected it to take most of the ten billion years available .
On the other hand , we dont seem to have been visited by aliens .
I am discounting the reports of UFOs .
Why would they appear only to cranks and weirdoes ?
If there is a government conspiracy to suppress the reports and keep for itself the scientific knowledge the aliens bring , it seems to have been a singularly ineffective policy so far .
Furthermore , despite an extensive search by the SETI project , we havent heard any alien television quiz shows .
This probably indicates that there are no alien civilizations at our stage of development within a radius of a few hundred light years .
Issuing an insurance policy against abduction by aliens seems a pretty safe bet .
This brings me to the last of the big questions : the future of the human race .
If we are the only intelligent beings in the galaxy , we should make sure we survive and continue .
But we are entering an increasingly dangerous period of our history .
Our population and our use of the finite resources of planet Earth are growing exponentially , along with our technical ability to change the environment for good or ill .
But our genetic code still carries the selfish and aggressive instincts that were of survival advantage in the past .
It will be difficult enough to avoid disaster in the next hundred years , let alone the next thousand or million .
Our only chance of long - term survival is not to remain lurking on planet Earth , but to spread out into space .
The answers to these big questions show that we have made remarkable progress in the last hundred years .
But if we want to continue beyond the next hundred years , our future is in space .
That is why I am in favor of manned  -  -  or should I say , personed  -  -  space flight .
All of my life I have sought to understand the universe and find answers to these questions .
I have been very lucky that my disability has not been a serious handicap .
Indeed , it has probably given me more time than most people to pursue the quest for knowledge .
The ultimate goal is a complete theory of the universe , and we are making good progress .
Thank you for listening .
Professor , if you had to guess either way , do you now believe that it is more likely than not that we are alone in the Milky Way , as a civilization of our level of intelligence or higher ?
This answer took seven minutes , and really gave me an insight into the incredible act of generosity this whole talk was for TED .
Stephen Hawking : I think it quite likely that we are the only civilization within several hundred light years ; otherwise we would have heard radio waves .
The alternative is that civilizations dont last very long , but destroy themselves .
Professor Hawking , thank you for that answer .
We will take it as a salutary warning , I think , for the rest of our conference this week .
Professor , we really thank you for the extraordinary effort you made to share your questions with us today .
Thank you very much indeed .
Amanda Bennett : We need a heroic narrative for death
Amanda Bennett and her husband were passionate and full of life all throughout their lives together  -  -  and up until the final days , too . Bennett gives a sweet yet powerful talk on why , for the loved ones of the dying , having hope for a happy ending shouldnt warrant a diagnosis of  denial .  She calls for a more heroic narrative for death  -  -  to match the ones we have in life .
So Id like you to come back with me just for a few minutes to a dark night in China , the night I met my husband .
It was a city so long ago that it was still called Peking .
So I went to a party .
I sat down next to a stout , middle - aged man with owl glasses and a bow tie , and he turned out to be a Fulbright scholar , there in China specifically to study Sino - Soviet relations .
What a gift it was to the eager , young foreign correspondent that I was then .
Id pump him for information , Im mentally scribbling notes for the stories I plan to write .
I talk to him for hours .
Only months later , I discover who he really was .
He was the China representative for the American Soybean Association .
 I dont understand . Soybeans ?
You told me you were a Fulbright scholar . 
 Well , how long would you have talked to me if I told you were in soybeans ? 
I said ,  You jerk . 
Only jerk wasnt the word I used .
I said ,  You couldve gotten me fired . 
And he said ,  Lets get married . 
 Travel the world and have lots of kids . 
So we did .
And what an alive man Terence Bryan Foley turned out to be .
He was a Chinese scholar who later , in his 60s , got a Ph.D . in Chinese history .
He spoke six languages , he played 15 musical instruments , he was a licensed pilot , he had once been a San Francisco cable car operator , he was an expert in swine nutrition , dairy cattle , Dixieland jazz , film noir , and we did travel the country , and the world , and we did have a lot of kids .
We followed my job , and it seemed like there was nothing that we couldnt do .
So when we found the cancer , it doesnt seem strange to us at all that without saying a word to each other , we believed that , if we were smart enough and strong enough and brave enough , and we worked hard enough , we could keep him from dying ever .
And for years , it seemed like we were succeeding .
The surgeon emerged from the surgery .
Whatd he say ? He said what surgeons always say :  We got it all . 
Then there was a setback when the pathologists looked at the kidney cancer closely .
It turned out to be a rare , exceedingly aggressive type , with a diagnosis that was almost universally fatal in several weeks at most .
And yet , he did not die .
Mysteriously , he lived on .
He coached Little League for our son .
He built a playhouse for our daughter .
And meanwhile , Im burying myself in the Internet looking for specialists .
Im looking for a cure .
So a year goes by before the cancer , as cancers do , reappears , and with it comes another death sentence , this time nine months .
So we try another treatment , aggressive , nasty .
It makes him so sick , he has to quit it , yet still he lives on .
Then another year goes by .
Two years go by .
More specialists .
We take the kids to Italy .
We take the kids to Australia .
And then more years pass , and the cancer begins to grow .
This time , theres new treatments on the horizon .
Theyre exotic . Theyre experimental .
Theyre going to attack the cancer in new ways .
So he enters a clinical trial , and it works .
The cancer begins to shrink , and for the third time , weve dodged death .
So now I ask you , how do I feel when the time finally comes and theres another dark night , sometime between midnight and 2 a.m . ?
This time its on the intensive care ward when a twentysomething resident that Ive never met before tells me that Terence is dying , perhaps tonight .
So what do I say when he says ,  What do you want me to do ? 
Theres another drug out there .
Its newer . Its more powerful .
He started it just two weeks ago .
Perhaps theres still hope ahead .
So what do I say ?
I say ,  Keep him alive if you can . 
And Terence died six days later .
So we fought , we struggled , we triumphed .
It was an exhilarating fight , and Id repeat the fight today without a moments hesitation .
We fought together , we lived together .
It turned what could have been seven of the grimmest years of our life into seven of the most glorious .
It was also an expensive fight .
It was the kind of fight and the kind of choices that everyone here agrees pump up the cost of end - of - life care , and of healthcare for all of us .
And for me , for us , we pushed the fight right over the edge , and I never got the chance to say to him what I say to him now almost every day :  Hey , buddy , it was a hell of a ride . 
We never got the chance to say goodbye .
We never thought it was the end .
We always had hope .
So what do we make of all of this ?
Being a journalist , after Terence died , I wrote a book ,  The Cost Of Hope . 
I wrote it because I wanted to know why I did what I did , why he did what he did , why everyone around us did what they did .
And what did I discover ?
Well , one of the things I discovered is that experts think that one answer to what I did at the end was a piece of paper , the advance directive , to help families get past the seemingly irrational choices .
Yet I had that piece of paper .
We both did .
And they were readily available .
I had them right at hand .
Both of them said the same thing : Do nothing if there is no further hope .
I knew Terences wishes as clearly and as surely as I knew my own .
Yet we never got to no further hope .
Even with that clear - cut paper in our hands , we just kept redefining hope .
I believed I could keep him from dying , and Id be embarrassed to say that if I hadnt seen so many people and have talked to so many people who have felt exactly the same way .
Right up until days before his death , I felt strongly and powerfully , and , you might say , irrationally , that I could keep him from dying ever .
Now , what do the experts call this ?
They say its denial .
Its a strong word , isnt it ?
Yet I will tell you that denial isnt even close to a strong enough word to describe what those of us facing the death of our loved ones go through .
And I hear the medical professionals say ,  Well , wed like to do such - and - such , but the familys in denial .
The family wont listen to reason .
Theyre in denial .
How can they insist on this treatment at the end ?
Its so clear , yet theyre in denial . 
Now , I think this maybe isnt a very useful way of thinking .
Its not just families either .
The medical professionals too , you out there , youre in denial too .
You want to help . You want to fix .
You want to do .
Youve succeeded in everything youve done , and having a patient die , well , that must feel like failure .
I saw it firsthand .
Just days before Terence died , his oncologist said ,  Tell Terence that better days are just ahead . 
Days before he died .
Yet Ira Byock , the director of palliative medicine at Dartmouth said ,  You know , the best doctor in the world has never succeeded in making anyone immortal . 
So what the experts call  denial ,  I call  hope ,  and Id like to borrow a phrase from my friends in software design .
You just redefine denial and hope , and it becomes a feature of being human .
Its not a bug .
Its a feature .
So we need to think more constructively about this very common , very profound and very powerful human emotion .
Its part of the human condition , and yet our system and our thinking isnt built to accommodate it .
So Terence told me a story on that long - ago night , and I believed it .
Maybe I wanted to believe it .
And during Terences illness , I , we , we wanted to believe the story of our fight together too .
Giving up the fight  -  -  for thats how it felt , it felt like giving up  -  -  meant giving up not only his life but also our story , our story of us as fighters , the story of us as invincible , and for the doctors , the story of themselves as healers .
So what do we need ?
Maybe we dont need a new piece of paper .
Maybe we need a new story , not a story about giving up the fight or of hopelessness , but rather a story of victory and triumph , of a valiant battle and , eventually , a graceful retreat , a story that acknowledges that not even the greatest general defeats every foe , that no doctor has ever succeeded in making anyone immortal , and that no wife , no matter how hard she tried , has ever stopped even the bravest , wittiest and most maddeningly lovable husband from dying when it was his time to go .
People did mention hospice , but I wouldnt listen .
Hospice was for people who were dying , and Terence wasnt dying .
As a result , he spent just four days in hospice , which Im sure , as you all know , is a pretty typical outcome , and we never said goodbye because we were unprepared for the end .
We have a noble path to curing the disease , patients and doctors alike , but there doesnt seem to be a noble path to dying .
Dying is seen as failing , and we had a heroic narrative for fighting together , but we didnt have a heroic narrative for letting go .
So maybe we need a narrative for acknowledging the end , and for saying goodbye , and maybe our new story will be about a heros fight , and a heros goodbye .
Terence loved poetry , and the Greek poet Constantine Cavafy is one of my favorite poets .
So Ill give you a couple lines from him .
This is a poem about Mark Antony .
You know Mark Antony , the conquering hero , Cleopatras guy ?
Actually , one of Cleopatras guys .
And hes been a pretty good general .
Hes won all the fights , hes eluded all the people that are out to get him , and yet this time , finally , hes come to the city of Alexandria and realized hes lost .
The people are leaving . Theyre playing instruments .
Theyre singing .
And suddenly he knows hes been defeated .
And he suddenly knows hes been deserted by the gods , and its time to let go .
And the poet tells him what to do .
He tells him how to say a noble goodbye , a goodbye thats fit for a hero .
 As if long - prepared , as if courageous , as it becomes you who were worthy of such a city , approach the window with a firm step , and with emotion , but not with the entreaties or the complaints of a coward , as a last enjoyment , listen to the sounds , the exquisite instruments of the musical troops , and bid her farewell , the Alexandria you are losing . 
Thats a goodbye for a man who was larger than life , a goodbye for a man for whom anything , well , almost anything , was possible , a goodbye for a man who kept hope alive .
And isnt that what were missing ?
How can we learn that peoples decisions about their loved ones are often based strongly , powerfully , many times irrationally , on the slimmest of hopes ?
The overwhelming presence of hope isnt denial .
Its part of our DNA as humans , and maybe its time our healthcare system  -  -  doctors , patients , insurance companies , us , started accounting for the power of that hope .
Hope isnt a bug .
Its a feature .
Thank you .
Juliana Machado Ferreira : The fight to end rare - animal trafficking in Brazil
Biologist Juliana Machado Ferreira , a TED Senior Fellow , talks about her work helping to save birds and other animals stolen from the wild in Brazil . Once these animals are seized from smugglers , she asks , then what ?
Illegal wildlife trade in Brazil is one of the major threats against our fauna , especially birds , and mainly to supply the pet market with thousands of animals taken from nature every month , and transported far from their origins , to be sold mainly in Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo .
It is estimated that all kinds of illegal wildlife trade in Brazil withdraw from nature almost 38 million animals every year , a business worth almost two billion dollars .
The police intercepts these huge cargos with live animals , intended to supply the pet market , or they seize the animals directly from the peoples houses , and this is how we end up , every month , with thousands of seized animals .
And for us to understand what happens with them , were going to follow Brad .
In the eyes of many people , after the animals are seized , they say ,  Yay , justice has been served .
The good guys arrived , took the cute , mistreated animals from the hands of the evil traffickers , and everyone lived happily ever after . 
But did they ? Actually , no , and this is where many of our problems begin .
Because we have to figure out what to do with all these animals .
In Brazil , they are usually first sent to governmental triage facilities , in which most of the cases , the conditions are as bad as with the traffickers .
In 2002 , these centers received 45,000 animals , of which 37,000 were birds .
And the police estimates that we seize only five percent of whats being trafficked .
Some lucky ones  -  -  and among them , Brad  -  -  go to serious rehabilitation centers after that .
And in these places they are cared for .
They train their flying , they learn how to recognize the food they will find in nature , and they are able to socialize with others from the same species .
But then what ?
The Brazil Ornithological Society  -  -  so now were talking only birds  -  -  claims that we have too little knowledge about the species in nature .
Therefore , it would be too risky to release these animals , both for the released and for the natural populations .
They also claim that we spend too many resources in their rehabilitation .
Following this argument , they suggest that all the birds seized from non - threatened species should be euthanized .
However , this would mean having killed 26,267 birds , only in the state of São Paulo , only in 2006 .
But , some researchers , myself included  -  -  some NGOs and some people from the Brazilian government  -  -  believe there is an alternative .
We think that if and when the animals meet certain criteria concerning their health , behavior , inferred origin and whatever we know about the natural populations , then technically responsible releases are possible , both for the well - being of the individual , and for the conservation of the species and their ecosystems , because we will be returning genes for these populations  -  -  which could be important for them in facing environmental challenges  -  -  and also we could be returning potential seed dispersers , predators , preys , etc .
All of these were released by us .
On the top , the turtles are just enjoying freedom .
On the middle , this guy nested a couple of weeks after the release .
And on the bottom , my personal favorite , the little male over there , four hours after his release he was together with a wild female .
So , this is not new , people have been doing this around the world .
But its still a big issue in Brazil .
We believe we have performed responsible releases .
Weve registered released animals mating in nature and having chicks .
So , these genes are indeed going back to the populations .
However this is still a minority for the very lack of knowledge .
So , I say ,  Lets study more , lets shed light on this issue , lets do whatever we can . 
Im devoting my career to that .
And Im here to urge each and every one of you to do whatever is in your reach : Talk to your neighbor , teach your children , make sure your pet is from a legal breeder .
We need to act , and act now , before these ones are the only ones left .
Thank you very much .
Shawn Achor : The happy secret to better work
We believe that we should work to be happy , but could that be backwards ? In this fast - moving and entertaining talk , psychologist Shawn Achor argues that actually happiness inspires productivity . 
When I was seven years old and my sister was just five years old , we were playing on top of a bunk bed .
I was two years older than my sister at the time  -  -  I mean , Im two years older than her now  -  -  but at the time it meant she had to do everything that I wanted to do , and I wanted to play war .
So we were up on top of our bunk beds .
And on one side of the bunk bed , I had put out all of my G.I . Joe soldiers and weaponry .
And on the other side were all my sisters My Little Ponies ready for a cavalry charge .
There are differing accounts of what actually happened that afternoon , but since my sister is not here with us today , let me tell you the true story  -  -   -  -  which is my sisters a little bit on the clumsy side .
Somehow , without any help or push from her older brother at all , suddenly Amy disappeared off of the top of the bunk bed and landed with this crash on the floor .
Now I nervously peered over the side of the bed to see what had befallen my fallen sister and saw that she had landed painfully on her hands and knees on all fours on the ground .
I was nervous because my parents had charged me with making sure that my sister and I played as safely and as quietly as possible .
And seeing as how I had accidentally broken Amys arm just one week before ...
... heroically pushing her out of the way of an oncoming imaginary sniper bullet , for which I have yet to be thanked , I was trying as hard as I could  -  -  she didnt even see it coming  -  -  I was trying as hard as I could to be on my best behavior .
And I saw my sisters face , this wail of pain and suffering and surprise threatening to erupt from her mouth and threatening to wake my parents from the long winters nap for which they had settled .
So I did the only thing my little frantic seven year - old brain could think to do to avert this tragedy .
And if you have children , youve seen this hundreds of times before .
I said ,  Amy , Amy , wait . Dont cry . Dont cry .
Did you see how you landed ?
No human lands on all fours like that .
Amy , I think this means youre a unicorn . 
Now that was cheating , because there was nothing in the world my sister would want more than not to be Amy the hurt five year - old little sister , but Amy the special unicorn .
Of course , this was an option that was open to her brain at no point in the past .
And you could see how my poor , manipulated sister faced conflict , as her little brain attempted to devote resources to feeling the pain and suffering and surprise she just experienced , or contemplating her new - found identity as a unicorn .
And the latter won out .
Instead of crying , instead of ceasing our play , instead of waking my parents , with all the negative consequences that would have ensued for me , instead a smile spread across her face and she scrambled right back up onto the bunk bed with all the grace of a baby unicorn ...
... with one broken leg .
What we stumbled across at this tender age of just five and seven  -  -  we had no idea at the time  -  -  was something that was going be at the vanguard of a scientific revolution occurring two decades later in the way that we look at the human brain .
What we had stumbled across is something called positive psychology , which is the reason that Im here today and the reason that I wake up every morning .
When I first started talking about this research outside of academia , out with companies and schools , the very first thing they said to never do is to start your talk with a graph .
The very first thing I want to do is start my talk with a graph .
This graph looks boring , but this graph is the reason I get excited and wake up every morning .
And this graph doesnt even mean anything ; its fake data .
What we found is  -  -  If I got this data back studying you here in the room , I would be thrilled , because theres very clearly a trend thats going on there , and that means that I can get published , which is all that really matters .
The fact that theres one weird red dot thats up above the curve , theres one weirdo in the room  -  -  I know who you are , I saw you earlier  -  -  thats no problem .
Thats no problem , as most of you know , because I can just delete that dot .
I can delete that dot because thats clearly a measurement error .
And we know thats a measurement error because its messing up my data .
So one of the very first things we teach people in economics and statistics and business and psychology courses is how , in a statistically valid way , do we eliminate the weirdos .
How do we eliminate the outliers so we can find the line of best fit ?
Which is fantastic if Im trying to find out how many Advil the average person should be taking  -  -  two .
But if Im interested in potential , if Im interested in your potential , or for happiness or productivity or energy or creativity , what were doing is were creating the cult of the average with science .
If I asked a question like ,  How fast can a child learn how to read in a classroom ? 
scientists change the answer to  How fast does the average child learn how to read in that classroom ? 
and then we tailor the class right towards the average .
Now if you fall below the average on this curve , then psychologists get thrilled , because that means youre either depressed or you have a disorder , or hopefully both .
Were hoping for both because our business model is , if you come into a therapy session with one problem , we want to make sure you leave knowing you have 10 , so you keep coming back over and over again .
Well go back into your childhood if necessary , but eventually what we want to do is make you normal again .
But normal is merely average .
And what I posit and what positive psychology posits is that if we study what is merely average , we will remain merely average .
Then instead of deleting those positive outliers , what I intentionally do is come into a population like this one and say , why ?
Why is it that some of you are so high above the curve in terms of your intellectual ability , athletic ability , musical ability , creativity , energy levels , your resiliency in the face of challenge , your sense of humor ?
Whatever it is , instead of deleting you , what I want to do is study you .
Because maybe we can glean information  -  -  not just how to move people up to the average , but how we can move the entire average up in our companies and schools worldwide .
The reason this graph is important to me is , when I turn on the news , it seems like the majority of the information is not positive , in fact its negative .
Most of its about murder , corruption , diseases , natural disasters .
And very quickly , my brain starts to think thats the accurate ratio of negative to positive in the world .
What thats doing is creating something called the medical school syndrome  -  -  which , if you know people whove been to medical school , during the first year of medical training , as you read through a list of all the symptoms and diseases that could happen , suddenly you realize you have all of them .
I have a brother in - law named Bobo  -  -  which is a whole other story .
Bobo married Amy the unicorn .
Bobo called me on the phone from Yale Medical School , and Bobo said ,  Shawn , I have leprosy . 
Which , even at Yale , is extraordinarily rare .
But I had no idea how to console poor Bobo because he had just gotten over an entire week of menopause .
See what were finding is its not necessarily the reality that shapes us , but the lens through which your brain views the world that shapes your reality .
And if we can change the lens , not only can we change your happiness , we can change every single educational and business outcome at the same time .
When I applied to Harvard , I applied on a dare .
I didnt expect to get in , and my family had no money for college .
When I got a military scholarship two weeks later , they allowed me to go .
Suddenly , something that wasnt even a possibility became a reality .
When I went there , I assumed everyone else would see it as a privilege as well , that theyd be excited to be there .
Even if youre in a classroom full of people smarter than you , youd be happy just to be in that classroom , which is what I felt .
But what I found there is , while some people experience that , when I graduated after my four years and then spent the next eight years living in the dorms with the students  -  -  Harvard asked me to ; I wasnt that guy .
I was an officer of Harvard to counsel students through the difficult four years .
And what I found in my research and my teaching is that these students , no matter how happy they were with their original success of getting into the school , two weeks later their brains were focused , not on the privilege of being there , nor on their philosophy or their physics .
Their brain was focused on the competition , the workload , the hassles , the stresses , the complaints .
When I first went in there , I walked into the freshmen dining hall , which is where my friends from Waco , Texas , which is where I grew up  -  -  I know some of you have heard of it .
When theyd come to visit me , theyd look around , theyd say ,  This freshman dining hall looks like something out of Hogwarts from the movie  Harry Potter ,  which it does .
This is Hogwarts from the movie  Harry Potter  and thats Harvard .
And when they see this , they say ,  Shawn , why do you waste your time studying happiness at Harvard ?
Seriously , what does a Harvard student possibly have to be unhappy about ? 
Embedded within that question is the key to understanding the science of happiness .
Because what that question assumes is that our external world is predictive of our happiness levels , when in reality , if I know everything about your external world , I can only predict 10 percent of your long - term happiness .
90 percent of your long - term happiness is predicted not by the external world , but by the way your brain processes the world .
And if we change it , if we change our formula for happiness and success , what we can do is change the way that we can then affect reality .
What we found is that only 25 percent of job successes are predicted by I.Q .
75 percent of job successes are predicted by your optimism levels , your social support and your ability to see stress as a challenge instead of as a threat .
I talked to a boarding school up in New England , probably the most prestigious boarding school , and they said ,  We already know that .
So every year , instead of just teaching our students , we also have a wellness week .
And were so excited . Monday night we have the worlds leading expert coming in to speak about adolescent depression .
Tuesday night its school violence and bullying .
Wednesday night is eating disorders .
Thursday night is elicit drug use .
And Friday night were trying to decide between risky sex or happiness . 
I said ,  Thats most peoples Friday nights . 
Which Im glad you liked , but they did not like that at all .
Silence on the phone .
And into the silence , I said ,  Id be happy to speak at your school , but just so you know , thats not a wellness week , thats a sickness week .
What youve done is youve outlined all the negative things that can happen , but not talked about the positive . 
The absence of disease is not health .
Heres how we get to health : We need to reverse the formula for happiness and success .
In the last three years , Ive traveled to 45 different countries , working with schools and companies in the midst of an economic downturn .
And what I found is that most companies and schools follow a formula for success , which is this : If I work harder , Ill be more successful .
And if Im more successful , then Ill be happier .
That undergirds most of our parenting styles , our managing styles , the way that we motivate our behavior .
And the problem is its scientifically broken and backwards for two reasons .
First , every time your brain has a success , you just changed the goalpost of what success looked like .
You got good grades , now you have to get better grades , you got into a good school and after you get into a better school , you got a good job , now you have to get a better job , you hit your sales target , were going to change your sales target .
And if happiness is on the opposite side of success , your brain never gets there .
What weve done is weve pushed happiness over the cognitive horizon as a society .
And thats because we think we have to be successful , then well be happier .
But the real problem is our brains work in the opposite order .
If you can raise somebodys level of positivity in the present , then their brain experiences what we now call a happiness advantage , which is your brain at positive performs significantly better than it does at negative , neutral or stressed .
Your intelligence rises , your creativity rises , your energy levels rise .
In fact , what weve found is that every single business outcome improves .
Your brain at positive is 31 percent more productive than your brain at negative , neutral or stressed .
Youre 37 percent better at sales .
Doctors are 19 percent faster , more accurate at coming up with the correct diagnosis when positive instead of negative , neutral or stressed .
Which means we can reverse the formula .
If we can find a way of becoming positive in the present , then our brains work even more successfully as were able to work harder , faster and more intelligently .
What we need to be able to do is to reverse this formula so we can start to see what our brains are actually capable of .
Because dopamine , which floods into your system when youre positive , has two functions .
Not only does it make you happier , it turns on all of the learning centers in your brain allowing you to adapt to the world in a different way .
Weve found that there are ways that you can train your brain to be able to become more positive .
In just a two - minute span of time done for 21 days in a row , we can actually rewire your brain , allowing your brain to actually work more optimistically and more successfully .
Weve done these things in research now in every single company that Ive worked with , getting them to write down three new things that theyre grateful for for 21 days in a row , three new things each day .
And at the end of that , their brain starts to retain a pattern of scanning the world , not for the negative , but for the positive first .
Journaling about one positive experience youve had over the past 24 hours allows your brain to relive it .
Exercise teaches your brain that your behavior matters .
We find that meditation allows your brain to get over the cultural ADHD that weve been creating by trying to do multiple tasks at once and allows our brains to focus on the task at hand .
And finally , random acts of kindness are conscious acts of kindness .
We get people , when they open up their inbox , to write one positive email praising or thanking somebody in their social support network .
And by doing these activities and by training your brain just like we train our bodies , what weve found is we can reverse the formula for happiness and success , and in doing so , not only create ripples of positivity , but create a real revolution .
Thank you very much .
Dan Ariely : What makes us feel good about our work ?
What motivates us to work ? Contrary to conventional wisdom , it isnt just money . But its not exactly joy either . It seems that most of us thrive by making constant progress and feeling a sense of purpose . Behavioral economist Dan Ariely presents two eye - opening experiments that reveal our unexpected and nuanced attitudes toward meaning in our work . 
I want to talk a little bit today about labor and work .
When we think about how people work , the naive intuition we have is that people are like rats in a maze  -  -  that all people care about is money , and the moment we give people money , we can direct them to work one way , we can direct them to work another way .
This is why we give bonuses to bankers and pay in all kinds of ways .
And we really have this incredibly simplistic view of why people work and what the labor market looks like .
At the same time , if you think about it , theres all kinds of strange behaviors in the world around us .
Think about something like mountaineering and mountain climbing .
If you read books of people who climb mountains , difficult mountains , do you think that those books are full of moments of joy and happiness ?
No , they are full of misery .
In fact , its all about frostbite and difficulty to walk and difficulty of breathing  -  -  cold , challenging circumstances .
And if people were just trying to be happy , the moment they would get to the top , they would say ,  This was a terrible mistake .
Ill never do it again . 
 Instead , let me sit on a beach somewhere drinking mojitos . 
But instead , people go down , and after they recover , they go up again .
And if you think about mountain climbing as an example , it suggests all kinds of things .
It suggests that we care about reaching the end , a peak .
It suggests that we care about the fight , about the challenge .
It suggests that theres all kinds of other things that motivate us to work or behave in all kinds of ways .
And for me personally , I started thinking about this after a student came to visit me .
This was a student that was one of my students a few years earlier .
And he came one day back to campus .
And he told me the following story : He said that for more than two weeks , he was working on a PowerPoint presentation .
He was working in a big bank .
This was in preparation for a merger and acquisition .
And he was working very hard on this presentation  -  -  graphs , tables , information .
He stayed late at night every day .
And the day before it was due , he sent his PowerPoint presentation to his boss , and his boss wrote him back and said ,  Nice presentation , but the merger is canceled . 
And the guy was deeply depressed .
Now at the moment when he was working , he was actually quite happy .
Every night he was enjoying his work , he was staying late , he was perfecting this PowerPoint presentation .
But knowing that nobody would ever watch that made him quite depressed .
So I started thinking about how do we experiment with this idea of the fruits of our labor .
And to start with , we created a little experiment in which we gave people Legos , and we asked them to build with Legos .
And for some people , we gave them Legos and we said ,  Hey , would you like to build this Bionicle for three dollars ?
Well pay you three dollars for it . 
And people said yes , and they built with these Legos .
And when they finished , we took it , we put it under the table , and we said ,  Would you like to build another one , this time for $ 2.70 ? 
If they said yes , we gave them another one .
And when they finished , we asked them ,  Do you want to build another one ?  for $ 2.40 , $ 2.10 , and so on , until at some point people said ,  No more . Its not worth it for me . 
This was what we called the meaningful condition .
People built one Bionicle after another .
After they finished every one of them , we put them under the table .
And we told them that at the end of the experiment , we will take all these Bionicles , we will disassemble them , we will put them back in the boxes , and we will use it for the next participant .
There was another condition .
This other condition was inspired by David , my student .
And this other condition we called the Sisyphic condition .
And if you remember the story about Sisyphus , Sisyphus was punished by the gods to push the same rock up a hill , and when he almost got to the end , the rock would roll over , and he would have to start again .
And you can think about this as the essence of doing futile work .
You can imagine that if he pushed the rock on different hills , at least he would have some sense of progress .
Also , if you look at prison movies , sometimes the way that the guards torture the prisoners is to get them to dig a hole and when the prisoner is finished , they ask him to fill the hole back up and then dig again .
Theres something about this cyclical version of doing something over and over and over that seems to be particularly demotivating .
So in the second condition of this experiment , thats exactly what we did .
We asked people ,  Would you like to build one Bionicle for three dollars ? 
And if they said yes , they built it .
Then we asked them ,  Do you want to build another one for $ 2.70 ? 
And if they said yes , we gave them a new one , and as they were building it , we took apart the one that they just finished .
And when they finished that , we said ,  Would you like to build another one , this time for 30 cents less ? 
And if they said yes , we gave them the one that they built and we broke .
So this was an endless cycle of them building and us destroying in front of their eyes .
Now what happens when you compare these two conditions ?
The first thing that happened was that people built many more Bionicles  -  -  they built 11 versus seven  -  -  in the meaningful condition versus the Sisyphus condition .
And by the way , we should point out that this was not a big meaning .
People were not curing cancer or building bridges .
People were building Bionicles for a few cents .
And not only that , everybody knew that the Bionicles would be destroyed quite soon .
So there was not a real opportunity for big meaning .
But even the small meaning made a difference .
Now we had another version of this experiment .
In this other version of the experiment , we didnt put people in this situation , we just described to them the situation , much as I am describing to you now , and we asked them to predict what the result would be .
What happened ?
People predicted the right direction but not the right magnitude .
People who were just given the description of the experiment said that in the meaningful condition people would probably build one more Bionicle .
So people understand that meaning is important , they just dont understand the magnitude of the importance , the extent to which its important .
There was one other piece of data we looked at .
If you think about it , there are some people who love Legos and some people who dont .
And you would speculate that the people who love Legos will build more Legos , even for less money , because after all , they get more internal joy from it .
And the people who love Legos less will build less Legos because the enjoyment that they derive from it is lower .
And thats actually what we found in the meaningful condition .
There was a very nice correlation between love of Lego and the amount of Legos people built .
What happened in the Sisyphic condition ?
In that condition the correlation was zero .
There was no relationship between the love of Lego and how much people built , which suggests to me that with this manipulation of breaking things in front of peoples eyes , we basically crushed any joy that they could get out of this activity .
We basically eliminated it .
Soon after I finished running this experiment , I went to talk to a big software company in Seattle .
I cant tell you who they were , but they were a big company in Seattle .
And this was a group within this software company that was put in a different building .
And they asked them to innovate and create the next big product for this company .
And the week before I showed up , the CEO of this big software company went to that group , 200 engineers , and canceled the project .
And I stood there in front of 200 of the most depressed people Ive ever talked to .
And I described to them some of these Lego experiments , and they said they felt like they had just been through that experiment .
And I asked them , I said ,  How many of you now show up to work later than you used to ? 
And everybody raised their hand .
I said ,  How many of you now go home earlier than you used to ? 
And everybody raised their hand .
I asked them ,  How many of you now add not - so - kosher things to your expense reports ? 
And they didnt really raise their hands , but they took me out to dinner and showed me what they could do with expense reports .
And then I asked them , I said ,  What could the CEO have done to make you not as depressed ? 
And they came up with all kinds of ideas .
They said the CEO could have asked them to present to the whole company about their journey over the last two years and what they decided to do .
He could have asked them to think about which aspect of their technology could fit with other parts of the organization .
He could have asked them to build some prototypes , some next - generation prototypes , and seen how they would work .
But the thing is that any one of those would require some effort and motivation .
And I think the CEO basically did not understand the importance of meaning .
If the CEO , just like our participants , thought the essence of meaning is unimportant , then he  wouldnt  care .
And he would tell them ,  At the moment I directed you in this way , and now that I am directing you in this way , everything will be okay . 
But if you understood how important meaning is , then you would figure out that its actually important to spend some time , energy and effort in getting people to care more about what theyre doing .
The next experiment was slightly different .
We took a sheet of paper with random letters , and we asked people to find pairs of letters that were identical next to each other .
That was the task .
And people did the first sheet .
And then we asked them if they wanted to do the next sheet for a little bit less money and the next sheet for a little bit less money , and so on and so forth .
And we had three conditions .
In the first condition , people wrote their name on the sheet , found all the pairs of letters , gave it to the experimenter .
The experimenter would look at it , scan it from top to bottom , say  uh huh  and put it on the pile next to them .
In the second condition , people did not write their name on it .
The experimenter looked at it , took the sheet of paper , did not look at it , did not scan it , and simply put it on the pile of pages .
So you take a piece , you just put it on the side .
And in the third condition , the experimenter got the sheet of paper and directly put it into a shredder .
What happened in those three conditions ?
In this plot Im showing you at what pay rate people stopped .
So low numbers mean that people worked harder . They worked for much longer .
In the acknowledged condition , people worked all the way down to 15 cents .
At 15 cents per page , they basically stopped these efforts .
In the shredder condition , it was twice as much  -  -  30 cents per sheet .
And this is basically the result we had before .
You shred peoples efforts , output , you get them not to be as happy with what theyre doing .
But I should point out , by the way , that in the shredder condition , people could have cheated .
They could have done not so good work , because they realized that people were just shredding it .
So maybe the first sheet you would do good work , but then you see nobody is really testing it , so you would do more and more and more .
So in fact , in the shredder condition , people could have submitted more work and gotten more money and put less effort into it .
But what about the ignored condition ?
Would the ignored condition be more like the acknowledged or more like the shredder , or somewhere in the middle ?
It turns out it was almost like the shredder .
Now theres good news and bad news here .
The bad news is that ignoring the performance of people is almost as bad as shredding their effort in front of their eyes .
Ignoring gets you a whole way out there .
The good news is that by simply looking at something that somebody has done , scanning it and saying  uh huh ,  that seems to be quite sufficient to dramatically improve peoples motivations .
So the good news is that adding motivation doesnt seem to be so difficult .
The bad news is that eliminating motivations seems to be incredibly easy , and if we dont think about it carefully , we might overdo it .
So this is all in terms of negative motivation or eliminating negative motivation .
The next part I want to show you is something about the positive motivation .
So there is a store in the U.S . called IKEA .
And IKEA is a store with kind of okay furniture that takes a long time to assemble .
And I dont know about you , but every time I assemble one of those , it takes me much longer , its much more effortful , its much more confusing .
I put things in the wrong way .
I cant say enjoy those pieces .
I cant say I enjoy the process .
But when I finish it , I seem to like those IKEA pieces of furniture more than I like other ones .
And theres an old story about cake mixes .
So when they started cake mixes in the 40s , they would take this powder and they would put it in a box , and they would ask housewives to basically pour it in , stir some water in it , mix it , put it in the oven , and  -  -  voila !  -  -  you had cake .
But it turns out they were very unpopular .
People did not want them .
And they thought about all kinds of reasons for that .
Maybe the taste was not good .
No , the taste was great .
What they figured out was that there was not enough effort involved .
It was so easy that nobody could serve cake to their guests and say ,  Here is my cake . 
No , no , no , it was somebody elses cake .
It was as if you bought it in the store .
It didnt really feel like your own .
So what did they do ?
They took the eggs and the milk out of the powder .
Now you had to break the eggs and add them .
You had to measure the milk and add it , mixing it .
Now it was your cake . Now everything was fine .
Now I think a little bit like the IKEA effect , by getting people to work harder , they actually got them to love what theyre doing to a higher degree .
So how do we look at this question experimentally ?
We asked people to build some origami .
We gave them instructions on how to create origami , and we gave them a sheet of paper .
And these were all novices , and they built something that was really quite ugly  -  -  nothing like a frog or a crane .
But then we told them , we said ,  Look , this origami really belongs to us .
You worked for us , but Ill tell you what , well sell it to you .
How much do you want to pay for it ? 
And we measured how much they were willing to pay for it .
And we had two types of people .
We had the people who built it , and we had the people who did not build it and just looked at it as external observers .
And what we found was that the builders thought that these were beautiful pieces of origami , and they were willing to pay for them five times more than the people who just evaluated them externally .
Now you could say , if you were a builder , do you think that ,  Oh , I love this origami , but I know that nobody else would love it ? 
Or do you think ,  I love this origami , and everybody else will love it as well ? 
Which one of those two is correct ?
Turns out the builders not only loved the origami more , they thought that everybody would see the world in their view .
They thought everybody else would love it more as well .
In the next version we tried to do the IKEA effect .
We tried to make it more difficult .
So for some people we gave the same task .
For some people we made it harder by hiding the instructions .
At the top of the sheet , we had little diagrams of how do you fold origami .
For some people we just eliminated that .
So now this was tougher . What happened ?
Well in an objective way , the origami now was uglier , it was more difficult .
Now when we looked at the easy origami , we saw the same thing : Builders loved it more , evaluators loved it less .
When you looked at the hard instructions , the effect was larger .
Why ? Because now the builders loved it even more .
They put all this extra effort into it .
And evaluators ? They loved it even less .
Because in reality it was even uglier than the first version .
Of course , this tells you something about how we evaluate things .
Now think about kids .
Imagine I asked you ,  How much would you sell your kids for ? 
Your memories and associations and so on .
Most people would say for a lot , a lot of money  -  -  on good days .
But imagine this was slightly different .
Imagine if you did not have your kids , and one day you went to the park and you met some kids , and they were just like your kids .
And you played with them for a few hours .
And when you were about to leave , the parents said ,  Hey , by the way , just before you leave , if youre interested , theyre for sale . 
How much would you pay for them now ?
Most people say not that much .
And this is because our kids are so valuable , not just because of who they are , but because of us , because they are so connected to us and because of the time and connection .
And by the way , if you think that IKEA instructions are not good , think about the instructions that come with kids .
Those are really tough .
By the way , these are my kids , which , of course , are wonderful and so on .
Which comes to tell you one more thing , which is , much like our builders , when they look at the creature of their creation , we dont see that other people dont see things our way .
Let me say one last comment .
If you think about Adam Smith versus Karl Marx , Adam Smith had the very important notion of efficiency .
He gave an example of a pin factory .
He said pins have 12 different steps , and if one person does all 12 steps , production is very low .
But if you get one person to do step one and one person to do step two and step three and so on , production can increase tremendously .
And indeed , this is a great example and the reason for the Industrial Revolution and efficiency .
Karl Marx , on the other hand , said that the alienation of labor is incredibly important in how people think about the connection to what they are doing .
And if you make all 12 steps , you care about the pin .
But if you make one step every time , maybe you dont care as much .
And I think that in the Industrial Revolution , Adam Smith was more correct than Karl Marx , but the reality is that weve switched and now were in the knowledge economy .
And you can ask yourself , what happens in a knowledge economy ?
Is efficiency still more important than meaning ?
I think the answer is no .
I think that as we move to situations in which people have to decide on their own about how much effort , attention , caring , how connected they feel to it , are they thinking about labor on the way to work and in the shower and so on , all of a sudden Marx has more things to say to us .
So when we think about labor , we usually think about motivation and payment as the same thing , but the reality is that we should probably add all kinds of things to it  -  -  meaning , creation , challenges , ownership , identity , pride , etc .
And the good news is that if we added all of those components and thought about them , how do we create our own meaning , pride , motivation , and how do we do it in our workplace and for the employees , I think we could get people to both be more productive and happier .
Thank you very much .
Amy Lockwood : Selling condoms in the Congo
HIV is a serious problem in the DR Congo , and aid agencies have flooded the country with free and cheap condoms . But few people are using them . Why ?  Reformed marketer  Amy Lockwood offers a surprising answer that upends a traditional model of philanthropy .
I am a reformed marketer , and I now work in international development .
In October , I spent some time in the Democratic Republic of Congo , which is the  second  largest country in Africa .
In fact , its as large as Western Europe , but it only has 300 miles of paved roads .
The DRC is a dangerous place .
In the past 10 years , five million people have died due to a war in the east .
But war isnt the only reason that life is difficult in the DRC .
There are many health issues as well .
In fact , the HIV prevalence rate is 1.3 percent among adults .
This might not sound like a large number , but in a country with 76 million people , it means there are 930,000 that are infected .
And due to the poor infrastructure , only 25 percent of those are receiving the life - saving drugs that they need .
Which is why , in part , donor agencies provide condoms at low or no cost .
And so while I was in the DRC , I spent a lot of time talking to people about condoms , including Damien .
Damien runs a hotel outside of Kinshasa .
Its a hotel thats only open until midnight , so its not a place that you stay .
But it is a place where sex workers and their clients come .
Now Damien knows all about condoms , but he doesnt sell them .
He said theres just not in demand .
Its not surprising , because only three percent of people in the DRC use condoms .
Joseph and Christine , who run a pharmacy where they sell a number of these condoms , said despite the fact that donor agencies provide them at low or no cost , and they have marketing campaigns that go along with them , their customers dont buy the branded versions .
They like the generics .
And as a marketer , I found that curious .
And so I started to look at what the marketing looked like .
And it turns out that there are three main messages used by the donor agencies for these condoms : fear , financing and fidelity .
They name the condoms things like Vive ,  to live  or Trust .
They package it with the red ribbon that reminds us of HIV , put it in boxes that remind you who paid for them , show pictures of your wife or husband and tell you to protect them or to act prudently .
Now these are not the kinds of things that someone is thinking about just before they go get a condom .
What is it that you think about just before you get a condom ?
Sex !
And the private companies that sell condoms in these places , they understand this .
Their marketing is slightly different .
The name might not be much different , but the imagery sure is .
Some brands are aspirational , and certainly the packaging is incredibly provocative .
And this made me think that perhaps the donor agencies had just missed out on a key aspect of marketing : understanding whos the audience .
And for donor agencies , unfortunately , the audience tends to be people that arent even in the country theyre working  in  .
Its people back home , people that support their work , people like these .
But if what were really trying to do is stop the spread of HIV , we need to think about the customer , the people whose behavior needs to change  -  -  the couples , the young women , the young men  -  -  whose lives depend on it .
And so the lesson is this : it doesnt really matter what youre selling ; you just have to think about who is your customer , and what are the messages that are going to get them to change their behavior .
It might just save their lives .
Thank you .
Vicki Arroyo : Lets prepare for our new climate
As Vicki Arroyo says , its time to prepare our homes and cities for our changing climate , with its increased risk of flooding , drought and uncertainty . She illustrates this inspiring talk with bold projects from cities all over the world  -  -  local examples of thinking ahead .
This is the skyline of my hometown , New Orleans .
It was a great place to grow up , but its one of the most vulnerable spots in the world .
Half the city is already below sea level .
In 2005 , the world watched as New Orleans and the Gulf Coast were devastated by Hurricane Katrina .
One thousand , eight hundred and thirty - six people died . Nearly 300,000 homes were lost .
These are my mothers , at the top  -  -  although thats not her car , it was carried there by floodwaters up to the roof  -  -  and thats my sisters , below .
Fortunately , they and other family members got out in time , but they lost their homes , and as you can see , just about everything in them .
Other parts of the world have been hit by storms in even more devastating ways .
In 2008 , Cyclone Nargis and its aftermath killed 138,000 in Myanmar .
Climate change is affecting our homes , our communities , our way of life . We should be preparing at every scale and at every opportunity .
This talk is about being prepared for , and resilient to the changes that are coming and that will affect our homes and our collective home , the Earth .
The changes in these times wont affect us all equally .
There are important distributional consequences , and theyre not what you always might think .
In New Orleans , the elderly and female - headed households were among the most vulnerable .
For those in vulnerable , low - lying nations , how do you put a dollar value on losing your country where you ancestors are buried ? And where will your people go ?
And how will they cope in a foreign land ?
Will there be tensions over immigration , or conflicts over competition for limited resources ?
Its already fueled conflicts in Chad and Darfur .
Like it or not , ready or not , this is our future .
Sure , some are looking for opportunities in this new world .
Thats the Russians planting a flag on the ocean bottom to stake a claim for minerals under the receding Arctic sea ice .
But while there might be some short - term individual winners , our collective losses will far outweigh them .
Look no further than the insurance industry as they struggle to cope with mounting catastrophic losses from extreme weather events .
The military gets it . They call climate change a threat multiplier that could harm stability and security , while governments around the world are evaluating how to respond .
So what can we do ? How can we prepare and adapt ?
Id like to share three sets of examples , starting with adapting to violent storms and floods .
In New Orleans , the I - 10 Twin Spans , with sections knocked out in Katrina , have been rebuilt 21 feet higher to allow for greater storm surge .
And these raised and energy - efficient homes were developed by Brad Pitt and Make It Right for the hard - hit Ninth Ward .
The devastated church my mom attends has been not only rebuilt higher , its poised to become the first Energy Star church in the country .
Theyre selling electricity back to the grid thanks to solar panels , reflective paint and more .
Their March electricity bill was only 48 dollars .
Now these are examples of New Orleans rebuilding in this way , but better if others act proactively with these changes in mind .
For example , in Galveston , heres a resilient home that survived Hurricane Ike , when others on neighboring lots clearly did not .
And around the world , satellites and warning systems are saving lives in flood - prone areas such as Bangladesh .
But as important as technology and infrastructure are , perhaps the human element is even more critical .
We need better planning and systems for evacuation .
We need to better understand how people make decisions in times of crisis , and why .
While its true that many who died in Katrina did not have access to transportation , others who did refused to leave as the storm approached , often because available transportation and shelters refused to allow them to take their pets .
Imagine leaving behind your own pet in an evacuation or a rescue .
Fortunately in 2006 , Congress passed the Pet Evacuation and Transportation Standards Act — it spells  PETS  — to change that .
Second , preparing for heat and drought .
Farmers are facing challenges of drought from Asia to Africa , from Australia to Oklahoma , while heat waves linked with climate change have killed tens of thousands of people in Western Europe in 2003 , and again in Russia in 2010 .
In Ethiopia , 70 percent , thats 7 - 0 percent of the population , depends on rainfall for its livelihood .
Oxfam and Swiss Re , together with Rockefeller Foundation , are helping farmers like this one build hillside terraces and find other ways to conserve water , but theyre also providing for insurance when the droughts do come .
The stability this provides is giving the farmers the confidence to invest .
Its giving them access to affordable credit .
Its allowing them to become more productive so that they can afford their own insurance over time , without assistance .
Its a virtuous cycle , and one that could be replicated throughout the developing world .
After a lethal 1995 heat wave turned refrigerator trucks from the popular Taste of Chicago festival into makeshift morgues , Chicago became a recognized leader , tamping down on the urban heat island impact through opening cooling centers , outreach to vulnerable neighborhoods , planting trees , creating cool white or vegetated green roofs .
This is City Halls green roof , next to Cook Countys  portion of the  roof , which is 77 degrees Fahrenheit hotter at the surface .
Washington , D.C . , last year , actually led the nation in new green roofs installed , and theyre funding this in part thanks to a five - cent tax on plastic bags .
Theyre splitting the cost of installing these green roofs with home and building owners .
The roofs not only temper urban heat island impact but they save energy , and therefore money , the emissions that cause climate change , and they also reduce stormwater runoff .
So some solutions to heat can provide for win - win - wins .
Third , adapting to rising seas .
Sea level rise threatens coastal ecosystems , agriculture , even major cities . This is what one to two meters of sea level rise looks like in the Mekong Delta .
Thats where half of Vietnams rice is grown .
Infrastructure is going to be affected .
Airports around the world are located on the coast .
It makes sense , right ? Theres open space , the planes can take off and land without worrying about creating noise or avoiding tall buildings .
Heres just one example , San Francisco Airport , with 16 inches or more of flooding .
Imagine the staggering cost of protecting this vital infrastructure with levees .
But there might be some changes in store that you might not imagine . For example , planes require more runway for takeoff because the heated , less dense air , provides for less lift .
San Francisco is also spending 40 million dollars to rethink and redesign its water and sewage treatment , as water outfall pipes like this one can be flooded with seawater , causing backups at the plant , harming the bacteria that are needed to treat the waste .
So these outfall pipes have been retrofitted to shut seawater off from entering the system .
Beyond these technical solutions , our work at the Georgetown Climate Center with communities encourages them to look at what existing legal and policy tools are available and to consider how they can accommodate change .
For example , in land use , which areas do you want to protect , through adding a seawall , for example , alter , by raising buildings , or retreat from , to allow the migration of important natural systems , such as wetlands or beaches ?
Other examples to consider . In the U.K . , the Thames Barrier protects London from storm surge .
The Asian Cities Climate  Change  Resilience Network is restoring vital ecosystems like forest mangroves .
These are not only important ecosystems in their own right , but they also serve as a buffer to protect inland communities .
New York City is incredibly vulnerable to storms , as you can see from this clever sign , and to sea level rise , and to storm surge , as you can see from the subway flooding .
But back above ground , these raised ventilation grates for the subway system show that solutions can be both functional and attractive . In fact , in New York , San Francisco and London , designers have envisioned ways to better integrate the natural and built environments with climate change in mind .
I think these are inspiring examples of whats possible when we feel empowered to plan for a world that will be different .
But now , a word of caution .
Adaptations too important to be left to the experts .
Why ? Well , there are no experts .
Were entering uncharted territory , and yet our expertise and our systems are based on the past .
 Stationarity  is the notion that we can anticipate the future based on the past , and plan accordingly , and this principle governs much of our engineering , our design of critical infrastructure , city water systems , building codes , even water rights and other legal precedents .
But we can simply no longer rely on established norms .
Were operating outside the bounds of CO2 concentrations that the planet has seen for hundreds of thousands of years .
The larger point Im trying to make is this .
Its up to us to look at our homes and our communities , our vulnerabilities and our exposures to risk , and to find ways to not just survive , but to thrive , and its up to us to plan and to prepare and to call on our government leaders and require them to do the same , even while they address the underlying causes of climate change .
There are no quick fixes .
There are no one - size - fits - all solutions .
Were all learning by doing .
But the operative word is doing .
Thank you .
Aubrey de Grey : A roadmap to end aging
Cambridge researcher Aubrey de Grey argues that aging is merely a disease  -  -  and a curable one at that . Humans age in seven basic ways , he says , all of which can be averted .
18 minutes is an absolutely brutal time limit , so Im going to dive straight in , right at the point where I get this thing to work .
Here we go . Im going to talk about five different things .
Im going to talk about why defeating aging is desirable .
Im going to talk about why we have to get our shit together , and actually talk about this a bit more than we do .
Im going to talk about feasibility as well , of course .
Im going to talk about why we are so fatalistic about doing anything about aging .
And then Im going spend perhaps the second half of the talk talking about , you know , how we might actually be able to prove that fatalism is wrong , namely , by actually doing something about it .
Im going to do that in two steps .
The first one Im going to talk about is how to get from a relatively modest amount of life extension  -  -  which Im going to define as 30 years , applied to people who are already in middle - age when you start  -  -  to a point which can genuinely be called defeating aging .
Namely , essentially an elimination of the relationship between how old you are and how likely you are to die in the next year  -  -  or indeed , to get sick in the first place .
And of course , the last thing Im going to talk about is how to reach that intermediate step , that point of maybe 30 years life extension .
So Im going to start with why we should .
Now , I want to ask a question .
Hands up : anyone in the audience who is in favor of malaria ?
That was easy . OK .
OK . Hands up : anyone in the audience whos not sure whether malaria is a good thing or a bad thing ?
OK . So we all think malaria is a bad thing .
Thats very good news , because I thought that was what the answer would be .
Now the thing is , I would like to put it to you that the main reason why we think that malaria is a bad thing is because of a characteristic of malaria that it shares with aging .
And here is that characteristic .
The only real difference is that aging kills considerably more people than malaria does .
Now , I like in an audience , in Britain especially , to talk about the comparison with foxhunting , which is something that was banned after a long struggle , by the government not very many months ago .
I mean , I know Im with a sympathetic audience here , but , as we know , a lot of people are not entirely persuaded by this logic .
And this is actually a rather good comparison , it seems to me .
You know , a lot of people said ,  Well , you know , city boys have no business telling us rural types what to do with our time .
Its a traditional part of the way of life , and we should be allowed to carry on doing it .
Its ecologically sound ; it stops the population explosion of foxes . 
But ultimately , the government prevailed in the end , because the majority of the British public , and certainly the majority of members of Parliament , came to the conclusion that it was really something that should not be tolerated in a civilized society .
And I think that human aging shares all of these characteristics in spades .
What part of this do people not understand ?
Its not just about life , of course  -  -   -  -  its about healthy life , you know  -  -  getting frail and miserable and dependent is no fun , whether or not dying may be fun .
So really , this is how I would like to describe it .
Its a global trance .
These are the sorts of unbelievable excuses that people give for aging .
And , I mean , OK , Im not actually saying that these excuses are completely valueless .
There are some good points to be made here , things that we ought to be thinking about , forward planning so that nothing goes too  -  -  well , so that we minimize the turbulence when we actually figure out how to fix aging .
But these are completely crazy , when you actually remember your sense of proportion .
You know , these are arguments ; these are things that would be legitimate to be concerned about .
But the question is , are they so dangerous  -  -  these risks of doing something about aging  -  -  that they outweigh the downside of doing the opposite , namely , leaving aging as it is ?
Are these so bad that they outweigh condemning 100,000 people a day to an unnecessarily early death ?
You know , if you havent got an argument thats that strong , then just dont waste my time , is what I say .
Now , there is one argument that some people do think really is that strong , and here it is .
People worry about overpopulation ; they say ,  Well , if we fix aging , no ones going to die to speak of , or at least the death toll is going to be much lower , only from crossing St . Giles carelessly .
And therefore , were not going to be able to have many kids , and kids are really important to most people . 
And thats true .
And you know , a lot of people try to fudge this question , and give answers like this .
I dont agree with those answers . I think they basically dont work .
I think its true , that we will face a dilemma in this respect .
We will have to decide whether to have a low birth rate , or a high death rate .
A high death rate will , of course , arise from simply rejecting these therapies , in favor of carrying on having a lot of kids .
And , I say that thats fine  -  -  the future of humanity is entitled to make that choice .
Whats not fine is for us to make that choice on behalf of the future .
If we vacillate , hesitate , and do not actually develop these therapies , then we are condemning a whole cohort of people  -  -  who would have been young enough and healthy enough to benefit from those therapies , but will not be , because we havent developed them as quickly as we could  -  -  well be denying those people an indefinite life span , and I consider that that is immoral .
Thats my answer to the overpopulation question .
Right . So the next thing is , now why should we get a little bit more active on this ?
And the fundamental answer is that the pro - aging trance is not as dumb as it looks .
Its actually a sensible way of coping with the inevitability of aging .
Aging is ghastly , but its inevitable , so , you know , weve got to find some way to put it out of our minds , and its rational to do anything that we might want to do , to do that .
Like , for example , making up these ridiculous reasons why aging is actually a good thing after all .
But of course , that only works when we have both of these components .
And as soon as the inevitability bit becomes a little bit unclear  -  -  and we might be in range of doing something about aging  -  -  this becomes part of the problem .
This pro - aging trance is what stops us from agitating about these things .
And thats why we have to really talk about this a lot  -  -  evangelize , I will go so far as to say , quite a lot  -  -  in order to get peoples attention , and make people realize that they are in a trance in this regard .
So thats all Im going to say about that .
Im now going to talk about feasibility .
And the fundamental reason , I think , why we feel that aging is inevitable is summed up in a definition of aging that Im giving here .
A very simple definition .
Aging is a side effect of being alive in the first place , which is to say , metabolism .
This is not a completely tautological statement ; its a reasonable statement .
Aging is basically a process that happens to inanimate objects like cars , and it also happens to us , despite the fact that we have a lot of clever self - repair mechanisms , because those self - repair mechanisms are not perfect .
So basically , metabolism , which is defined as basically everything that keeps us alive from one day to the next , has side effects .
Those side effects accumulate and eventually cause pathology .
Thats a fine definition . So we can put it this way : we can say that , you know , we have this chain of events .
And there are really two games in town , according to most people , with regard to postponing aging .
Theyre what Im calling here the  gerontology approach  and the  geriatrics approach . 
The geriatrician will intervene late in the day , when pathology is becoming evident , and the geriatrician will try and hold back the sands of time , and stop the accumulation of side effects from causing the pathology quite so soon .
Of course , its a very short - term - ist strategy ; its a losing battle , because the things that are causing the pathology are becoming more abundant as time goes on .
The gerontology approach looks much more promising on the surface , because , you know , prevention is better than cure .
But unfortunately the thing is that we dont understand metabolism very well .
In fact , we have a pitifully poor understanding of how organisms work  -  -  even cells were not really too good on yet .
Weve discovered things like , for example , RNA interference only a few years ago , and this is a really fundamental component of how cells work .
Basically , gerontology is a fine approach in the end , but it is not an approach whose time has come when were talking about intervention .
So then , what do we do about that ?
I mean , thats a fine logic , that sounds pretty convincing , pretty ironclad , doesnt it ?
But it isnt .
Before I tell you why it isnt , Im going to go a little bit into what Im calling step two .
Just suppose , as I said , that we do acquire  -  -  lets say we do it today for the sake of argument  -  -  the ability to confer 30 extra years of healthy life on people who are already in middle age , lets say 55 .
Im going to call that  robust human rejuvenation .  OK .
What would that actually mean for how long people of various ages today  -  -  or equivalently , of various ages at the time that these therapies arrive  -  -  would actually live ?
In order to answer that question  -  -  you might think its simple , but its not simple .
We cant just say ,  Well , if theyre young enough to benefit from these therapies , then theyll live 30 years longer . 
Thats the wrong answer .
And the reason its the wrong answer is because of progress .
There are two sorts of technological progress really , for this purpose .
There are fundamental , major breakthroughs , and there are incremental refinements of those breakthroughs .
Now , they differ a great deal in terms of the predictability of time frames .
Fundamental breakthroughs : very hard to predict how long its going to take to make a fundamental breakthrough .
It was a very long time ago that we decided that flying would be fun , and it took us until 1903 to actually work out how to do it .
But after that , things were pretty steady and pretty uniform .
I think this is a reasonable sequence of events that happened in the progression of the technology of powered flight .
We can think , really , that each one is sort of beyond the imagination of the inventor of the previous one , if you like .
The incremental advances have added up to something which is not incremental anymore .
This is the sort of thing you see after a fundamental breakthrough .
And you see it in all sorts of technologies .
Computers : you can look at a more or less parallel time line , happening of course a bit later .
You can look at medical care . I mean , hygiene , vaccines , antibiotics  -  -  you know , the same sort of time frame .
So I think that actually step two , that I called a step a moment ago , isnt a step at all .
That in fact , the people who are young enough to benefit from these first therapies that give this moderate amount of life extension , even though those people are already middle - aged when the therapies arrive , will be at some sort of cusp .
They will mostly survive long enough to receive improved treatments that will give them a further 30 or maybe 50 years .
In other words , they will be staying ahead of the game .
The therapies will be improving faster than the remaining imperfections in the therapies are catching up with us .
This is a very important point for me to get across .
Because , you know , most people , when they hear that I predict that a lot of people alive today are going to live to 1,000 or more , they think that Im saying that were going to invent therapies in the next few decades that are so thoroughly eliminating aging that those therapies will let us live to 1,000 or more .
Im not saying that at all .
Im saying that the rate of improvement of those therapies will be enough .
Theyll never be perfect , but well be able to fix the things that 200 - year - olds die of , before we have any 200 - year - olds .
And the same for 300 and 400 and so on .
I decided to give this a little name , which is  longevity escape velocity . 
Well , it seems to get the point across .
So , these trajectories here are basically how we would expect people to live , in terms of remaining life expectancy , as measured by their health , for given ages that they were at the time that these therapies arrive .
If youre already 100 , or even if youre 80  -  -  and an average 80 - year - old , we probably cant do a lot for you with these therapies , because youre too close to deaths door for the really initial , experimental therapies to be good enough for you .
You wont be able to withstand them .
But if youre only 50 , then theres a chance that you might be able to pull out of the dive and , you know  -  -   -  -  eventually get through this and start becoming biologically younger in a meaningful sense , in terms of your youthfulness , both physical and mental , and in terms of your risk of death from age - related causes .
And of course , if youre a bit younger than that , then youre never really even going to get near to being fragile enough to die of age - related causes .
So this is a genuine conclusion that I come to , that the first 150 - year - old  -  -  we dont know how old that person is today , because we dont know how long its going to take to get these first - generation therapies .
But irrespective of that age , Im claiming that the first person to live to 1,000  -  -  subject of course , to , you know , global catastrophes  -  -  is actually , probably , only about 10 years younger than the first 150 - year - old .
And thats quite a thought .
Alright , so finally Im going to spend the rest of the talk , my last seven - and - a - half minutes , on step one ; namely , how do we actually get to this moderate amount of life extension that will allow us to get to escape velocity ?
And in order to do that , I need to talk about mice a little bit .
I have a corresponding milestone to robust human rejuvenation .
Im calling it  robust mouse rejuvenation ,  not very imaginatively .
And this is what it is .
I say were going to take a long - lived strain of mouse , which basically means mice that live about three years on average .
We do exactly nothing to them until theyre already two years old .
And then we do a whole bunch of stuff to them , and with those therapies , we get them to live , on average , to their fifth birthday .
So , in other words , we add two years  -  -  we treble their remaining lifespan , starting from the point that we started the therapies .
The question then is , what would that actually mean for the time frame until we get to the milestone I talked about earlier for humans ?
Which we can now , as Ive explained , equivalently call either robust human rejuvenation or longevity escape velocity .
Secondly , what does it mean for the publics perception of how long its going to take for us to get to those things , starting from the time we get the mice ?
And thirdly , the question is , what will it do to actually how much people want it ?
And it seems to me that the first question is entirely a biology question , and its extremely hard to answer .
One has to be very speculative , and many of my colleagues would say that we should not do this speculation , that we should simply keep our counsel until we know more .
I say thats nonsense .
I say we absolutely are irresponsible if we stay silent on this .
We need to give our best guess as to the time frame , in order to give people a sense of proportion so that they can assess their priorities .
So , I say that we have a 50 / 50 chance of reaching this RHR milestone , robust human rejuvenation , within 15 years from the point that we get to robust mouse rejuvenation .
15 years from the robust mouse .
The publics perception will probably be somewhat better than that .
The public tends to underestimate how difficult scientific things are .
So theyll probably think its five years away .
Theyll be wrong , but that actually wont matter too much .
And finally , of course , I think its fair to say that a large part of the reason why the public is so ambivalent about aging now is the global trance I spoke about earlier , the coping strategy .
That will be history at this point , because it will no longer be possible to believe that aging is inevitable in humans , since its been postponed so very effectively in mice .
So were likely to end up with a very strong change in peoples attitudes , and of course that has enormous implications .
So in order to tell you now how were going to get these mice , Im going to add a little bit to my description of aging .
Im going to use this word  damage  to denote these intermediate things that are caused by metabolism and that eventually cause pathology .
Because the critical thing about this is that even though the damage only eventually causes pathology , the damage itself is caused ongoing - ly throughout life , starting before were born .
But it is not part of metabolism itself .
And this turns out to be useful .
Because we can re - draw our original diagram this way .
We can say that , fundamentally , the difference between gerontology and geriatrics is that gerontology tries to inhibit the rate at which metabolism lays down this damage .
And Im going to explain exactly what damage is in concrete biological terms in a moment .
And geriatricians try to hold back the sands of time by stopping the damage converting into pathology .
And the reason its a losing battle is because the damage is continuing to accumulate .
So theres a third approach , if we look at it this way .
We can call it the  engineering approach ,  and I claim that the engineering approach is within range .
The engineering approach does not intervene in any processes .
It does not intervene in this process or this one .
And thats good because it means that its not a losing battle , and its something that we are within range of being able to do , because it doesnt involve improving on evolution .
The engineering approach simply says ,  Lets go and periodically repair all of these various types of damage  -  -  not necessarily repair them completely , but repair them quite a lot , so that we keep the level of damage down below the threshold that must exist , that causes it to be pathogenic . 
We know that this threshold exists , because we dont get age - related diseases until were in middle age , even though the damage has been accumulating since before we were born .
Why do I say that were in range ? Well , this is basically it .
The point about this slide is actually the bottom .
If we try to say which bits of metabolism are important for aging , we will be here all night , because basically all of metabolism is important for aging in one way or another .
This list is just for illustration ; it is incomplete .
The list on the right is also incomplete .
Its a list of types of pathology that are age - related , and its just an incomplete list .
But I would like to claim to you that this list in the middle is actually complete  -  -  this is the list of types of thing that qualify as damage , side effects of metabolism that cause pathology in the end , or that might cause pathology .
And there are only seven of them .
Theyre categories of things , of course , but theres only seven of them .
Cell loss , mutations in chromosomes , mutations in the mitochondria and so on .
First of all , Id like to give you an argument for why that list is complete .
Of course one can make a biological argument .
One can say ,  OK , what are we made of ? 
Were made of cells and stuff between cells .
What can damage accumulate in ?
The answer is : long - lived molecules , because if a short - lived molecule undergoes damage , but then the molecule is destroyed  -  -  like by a protein being destroyed by proteolysis  -  -  then the damage is gone , too .
Its got to be long - lived molecules .
So , these seven things were all under discussion in gerontology a long time ago and that is pretty good news , because it means that , you know , weve come a long way in biology in these 20 years , so the fact that we havent extended this list is a pretty good indication that theres no extension to be done .
However , its better than that ; we actually know how to fix them all , in mice , in principle  -  -  and what I mean by in principle is , we probably can actually implement these fixes within a decade .
Some of them are partially implemented already , the ones at the top .
I havent got time to go through them at all , but my conclusion is that , if we can actually get suitable funding for this , then we can probably develop robust mouse rejuvenation in only 10 years , but we do need to get serious about it .
We do need to really start trying .
So of course , there are some biologists in the audience , and I want to give some answers to some of the questions that you may have .
You may have been dissatisfied with this talk , but fundamentally you have to go and read this stuff .
Ive published a great deal on this ; I cite the experimental work on which my optimism is based , and theres quite a lot of detail there .
The detail is what makes me confident of my rather aggressive time frames that Im predicting here .
So if you think that Im wrong , youd better damn well go and find out why you think Im wrong .
And of course the main thing is that you shouldnt trust people who call themselves gerontologists because , as with any radical departure from previous thinking within a particular field , you know , you expect people in the mainstream to be a bit resistant and not really to take it seriously .
So , you know , youve got to actually do your homework , in order to understand whether this is true .
And well just end with a few things .
One thing is , you know , youll be hearing from a guy in the next session who said some time ago that he could sequence the human genome in half no time , and everyone said ,  Well , its obviously impossible . 
And you know what happened .
So , you know , this does happen .
We have various strategies  -  -  theres the Methuselah Mouse Prize , which is basically an incentive to innovate , and to do what you think is going to work , and you get money for it if you win .
Theres a proposal to actually put together an institute .
This is whats going to take a bit of money .
But , I mean , look  -  -  how long does it take to spend that on the war in Iraq ?
Not very long . OK .
Its got to be philanthropic , because profits distract biotech , but its basically got a 90 percent chance , I think , of succeeding in this .
And I think we know how to do it . And Ill stop there .
Thank you .
OK . I dont know if theres going to be any questions but I thought I would give people the chance .
Audience : Since youve been talking about aging and trying to defeat it , why is it that you make yourself appear like an old man ?
AG : Because I am an old man . I am actually 158 .
Audience : Species on this planet have evolved with immune systems to fight off all the diseases so that individuals live long enough to procreate .
However , as far as I know , all the species have evolved to actually die , so when cells divide , the telomerase get shorter , and eventually species die .
So , why does  -  -  evolution has  -  -  seems to have selected against immortality , when it is so advantageous , or is evolution just incomplete ?
AG : Brilliant . Thank you for asking a question that I can answer with an uncontroversial answer .
Im going to tell you the genuine mainstream answer to your question , which I happen to agree with , which is that , no , aging is not a product of selection , evolution ;  aging  is simply a product of evolutionary neglect .
In other words , we have aging because its hard work not to have aging ; you need more genetic pathways , more sophistication in your genes in order to age more slowly , and that carries on being true the longer you push it out .
So , to the extent that evolution doesnt matter , doesnt care whether genes are passed on by individuals , living a long time or by procreation , theres a certain amount of modulation of that , which is why different species have different lifespans , but thats why there are no immortal species .
The genes dont care but we do ?
AG : Thats right .
Audience : Hello . I read somewhere that in the last 20 years , the average lifespan of basically anyone on the planet has grown by 10 years .
If I project that , that would make me think that I would live until 120 if I dont crash on my motorbike .
That means that Im one of your subjects to become a 1,000 - year - old ?
AG : If you lose a bit of weight .
Your numbers are a bit out .
The standard numbers are that lifespans have been growing at between one and two years per decade .
So , its not quite as good as you might think , you might hope .
But I intend to move it up to one year per year as soon as possible .
Audience : I was told that many of the brain cells we have as adults are actually in the human embryo , and that the brain cells last 80 years or so .
If that is indeed true , biologically are there implications in the world of rejuvenation ?
If there are cells in my body that live all 80 years , as opposed to a typical , you know , couple of months ?
AG : There are technical implications certainly .
Basically what we need to do is replace cells in those few areas of the brain that lose cells at a respectable rate , especially neurons , but we dont want to replace them any faster than that  -  -  or not much faster anyway , because replacing them too fast would degrade cognitive function .
What I said about there being no non - aging species earlier on was a little bit of an oversimplification .
There are species that have no aging  -  -  Hydra for example  -  -  but they do it by not having a nervous system  -  -  and not having any tissues in fact that rely for their function on very long - lived cells .
Lewis Pugh : My mind - shifting Everest swim
After he swam the North Pole , Lewis Pugh vowed never to take another cold - water dip . Then he heard of Lake Imja in the Himalayas , created by recent glacial melting , and Lake Pumori , a body of water at an altitude of 5300 m on Everest  -  -  and so began a journey that would teach him a radical new way to approach swimming and think about climate change .
Last year when I was here , I was speaking to you about a swim which I did across the North Pole .
And while that swim took place three years ago , I can remember it as if it was yesterday .
I remember standing on the edge of the ice , about to dive into the water , and thinking to myself , I have never ever seen any place on this earth which is just so frightening .
The water is completely black .
The water is minus 1.7 degrees centigrade , or 29 degrees Fahrenheit .
Its flipping freezing in that water .
And then a thought came across my mind : if things go pear - shaped on this swim , how long will it take for my frozen body to sink the four and a half kilometers to the bottom of the ocean ?
And then I said to myself , Ive just got to get this thought And the only way I can dive into that freezing cold water and swim a kilometer is by listening to my iPod and really revving myself up , listening to everything from beautiful opera all the way across to Puff Daddy , and then committing myself a hundred percent  -  -  there is nothing more powerful than the made - up mind  -  -  and then walking up to the edge of the ice and just diving into the water .
And that swim took me 18 minutes and 50 seconds , and it felt like 18 days .
And I remember getting out of the water and my hands feeling so painful and looking down at my fingers , and my fingers were literally the size of sausages because  -  -  you know , were made partially of water  -  -  when water freezes it expands , and so the cells in my fingers had frozen and expanded and burst .
And the most immediate thought when I came out of that water was the following : Im never , ever going to do another cold water swim in my life again .
Anyway , last year , I heard about the Himalayas and the melting of the  -  -  and the melting of the glaciers because of climate change .
I heard about this lake , Lake Imja .
This lake has been formed in the last couple of years because of the melting of the glacier .
The glaciers gone all the way up the mountain and left in its place this big lake .
And I firmly believe that what were seeing in the Himalayas is the next great , big battleground on this earth .
Nearly two billion people  -  -  so one in three people on this earth  -  -  rely on the water from the Himalayas .
And with a population increasing as quickly as it is , and with the water supply from these glaciers  -  -  because of climate change  -  -  decreasing so much , I think we have a real risk of instability .
North , youve got China ; south , youve India , Pakistan , Bangladesh , all these countries .
And so I decided to walk up to Mt . Everest , the highest mountain on this earth , and go and do a symbolic swim underneath the summit of Mt . Everest .
Now , I dont know if any of you have had the opportunity to go to Mt . Everest , but its quite an ordeal getting up there .
28 great , big , powerful yaks carrying all the equipment up onto this mountain  -  -  I dont just have my Speedo , but theres a big film crew who then send all the images around the world .
The other thing which was so challenging about this swim is not just the altitude .
I wanted to do the swim at 5,300 meters above sea level .
So its right up in the heavens .
Its very , very difficult to breath . You get altitude sickness .
I feels like youve got a man standing behind you with a hammer just hitting your head all the time .
Thats not the worst part of it .
The worst part was this year was the year where they decided to do a big cleanup operation on Mt . Everest .
Many , many people have died on Mt . Everest , and this was the year they decided to go and recover all the bodies of the mountaineers and then bring them down the mountain .
And when youre walking up the mountain to attempt to do something which no human has ever done before , and , in fact , no fish  -  -  there are no fish up there swimming at 5,300 meters  -  -  When youre trying to do that , and then the bodies are coming past you , it humbles you , and you also realize very , very clearly that nature is so much more powerful than we are .
And we walked up this pathway , all the way up .
And to the right hand side of us was this great Khumbu Glacier .
And all the way along the glacier we saw these big pools of melting ice .
And then we got up to this small lake underneath the summit of Mt . Everest , and I prepared myself the same way as Ive always prepared myself , for this swim which was going to be so very difficult .
I put on my iPod , I listened to some music , I got myself as aggressive as possible  -  -  but controlled aggression  -  -  and then I hurled myself into that water .
I swam as quickly as I could for the first hundred meters , and then I realized very , very quickly , I had a huge problem on my hands .
I could barely breathe .
I was gasping for air .
I then began to choke , and then it quickly led to me vomiting in the water .
And it all happened so quickly : I then  -  -  I dont know how it happened  -  -  but I went underwater .
And luckily , the water was quite shallow , and I was able to push myself off the bottom of the lake and get up and then take another gasp of air .
And then I said , carry on . Carry on . Carry on .
I carried on for another five or six strokes , and then I had nothing in my body , and I went down to the bottom of the lake .
And I dont where I got it from , but I was able to somehow get to the side of the lake .
Ive heard it said that drowning is the most peaceful death that you can have .
I have never , ever heard such utter bollocks .
It is the most frightening and panicky feeling that you can have .
I got myself to the side of the lake .
My crew grabbed me , and then we walked as quickly as we could down  -  -  over the rubble  -  -  down to our camp .
And there , we sat down , and we did a debrief about what had gone wrong there on Mt . Everest .
And my team just gave it to me straight .
They said , Lewis , you need to have a radical tactical shift if you want to do this swim .
Every single thing which you have learned in the past 23 years of swimming , you must forget .
Every single thing which you learned when you were serving in the British army , about speed and aggression , you put that to one side .
We want you to walk up the hill in another two days time .
Take some time to rest and think about things .
We want you to walk up the mountain in two days time , and instead of swimming fast , swim as slowly as possible .
Instead of swimming crawl , swim breaststroke .
And remember , never ever swim with aggression .
This is the time to swim with real humility .
And so we walked back up to the mountain two days later .
And I stood there on the edge of the lake , and I looked up at Mt . Everest  -  -  and she is one of the most beautiful mountains on the earth  -  -  and I said to myself , just do this slowly .
And I swam across the lake .
And I cant begin to tell you how good I felt when I came to the other side .
But I learned two very , very important lessons there on Mt . Everest , and I thank my team of Sherpas who taught me this .
The first one is that just because something has worked in the past so well , doesnt mean its going to work in the future .
And similarly , now , before I do anything , I ask myself what type of mindset do I require to successfully complete a task .
And taking that into the world of climate change  -  -  which is , frankly , the Mt . Everest of all problems  -  -  just because weve lived the way we have lived for so long , and populated the earth the way we have for so long , doesnt mean that we can carry on the way we are carrying on .
The warning signs are all there .
When I was born , the worlds population was 3.5 billion people .
Were now 6.8 billion people , and were expected to be 9 billion people by 2050 .
And then the second lesson , the radical , tactical shift .
And Ive come here to ask you today : what radical tactical shift can you take in your relationship to the environment , which will ensure that our children and our grandchildren live in a safe world and a secure world , and most importantly , in a sustainable world ?
And I ask you , please , to go away from here and think about that one radical tactical shift which you could make , which will make that big difference , and then commit a hundred percent to doing it .
Blog about it , tweet about it , talk about it , and commit a hundred percent , because very , very few things are impossible to achieve if we really put our whole minds to it .
So thank you very , very much .
John Hodgman : Design , explained .
John Hodgman , comedian and resident expert ,  explains  the design of three iconic modern objects . 
Today Im going to unpack for you three examples of iconic design , and it makes perfect sense that I should be the one to do it because I have a Bachelors degree in Literature .
But Im also a famous minor television personality and an avid collector of Design Within Reach catalogs , so I pretty much know everything there is .
Now , Im sure you recognize this object ; many of you probably saw it as you were landing your private zeppelins at Los Angeles International Airport over the past couple of days .
This is known as the Theme Building ; that is its name for reasons that are still very murky .
And it is perhaps the best example we have in Los Angeles of ancient extraterrestrial architecture .
It was first excavated in 1961 as they were building LAX , although scientists believe that it dates back to the year 2000 Before Common Era , when it was used as a busy transdimensional space port by the ancient astronauts who first colonized this planet and raised our species from savagery by giving us the gift of written language and technology and the gift of revolving restaurants .
It is thought to have been a replacement for the older space ports located , of course , at Stonehenge and considered to be quite an improvement due to the uncluttered design , the lack of druids hanging around all the time and obviously , the much better access to parking .
When it was uncovered , it ushered in a new era of streamlined , archaically futuristic design called Googie , which came to be synonymous with the Jet Age , a misnomer .
After all , the ancient astronauts who used it did not travel by jet very often , preferring instead to travel by feathered serpent powered by crystal skulls .
Ah yes , a table .
We use these every day .
And on top of it , the juicy salif .
This is a design by Philippe Starck , who I believe is in the audience at this very moment .
And you can tell it is a Starck design by its precision , its playfulness , its innovation and its promise of imminent violence .
It is a design that challenges your intuition  -  -  it is not what you think it is when you first see it .
It is not a fork designed to grab three hors doeuvres at a time , which would be useful out in the lobby , I would say .
And despite its obvious influence by the ancient astronauts and its space agey - ness and tripodism , it is not something designed to attach to your brain and suck out your thoughts .
It is in fact a citrus juicer and when I say that , you never see it as anything else again .
It is also not a monument to design , it is a monument to designs utility .
You can take it home with you , unlike the Theme Building , which will stay where it is forever .
This is affordable and can come home with you and , as such , it can sit on your kitchen counter  -  -  it cant go in your drawers ; trust me , I found that out the hard way  -  -  and make your kitchen counter into a monument to design .
One other thing about it , if you do have one at home , let me tell you one of the features you may not know : when you fall asleep , it comes alive and it walks around your house and goes through your mail and watches you as you sleep .
Okay , what is this object ?
I have no idea . I dont know what that thing is .
It looks terrible . Is it a little hot plate ?
I dont get it .
Does anyone know ? Chi ?
Its an ... IPhone . IPhone .
Oh yes , thats right , I remember those ; I had my whole bathroom tiles redone with those back in the good old days .
No , I have an IPhone . Of course I do .
Here is my well - loved IPhone .
I do so many things on this little device .
I like to read books on it .
More than that , I like to buy books on it that I never have to feel guilty about not reading because they go in here and I never look at them again and its perfect .
I use it every day to measure the weight of an ox , for example .
Every now and then , I admit that I complete a phone call on it occasionally .
And yet I forget about it all the time .
This is a design that once you saw it , you forgot about it .
It is easy to forget the gasp - inducement that occurred in 2007 when you first touched this thing because it became so quickly pervasive and because of how instantly we adopted these gestures and made it an extension of our life .
Unlike the Theme Building , this is not alien technology .
Or I should say , what it did was it took technology which , unlike people in this room , to many other people in the world , still feels very alien , and made it immediately and instantly feel familiar and intimate .
And unlike the juicy salif , it does not threaten to attach itself to your brain , rather , it simply attaches itself to your brain .
And you didnt even notice it happened .
So there you go . My name is John Hodgman .
I just explained design .
Thank you very much .
Lakshmi Pratury : The lost art of letter - writing
Lakshmi Pratury remembers the lost art of letter - writing and shares a series of notes her father wrote to her before he died . Her short but heartfelt talk may inspire you to set pen to paper , too .
So I thought ,  I will talk about death . 
Seemed to be the passion today .
Actually , its not about death .
Its inevitable , terrible , but really what I want to talk about is , Im just fascinated by the legacy people leave when they die .
Thats what I want to talk about .
So Art Buchwald left his legacy of humor with a video that appeared soon after he died , saying ,  Hi ! Im Art Buchwald , and I just died . 
And Mike , who I met at Galapagos , a trip which I won at TED , is leaving notes on cyberspace where he is chronicling his journey through cancer .
And my father left me a legacy of his handwriting through letters and a notebook .
In the last two years of his life , when he was sick , he filled a notebook with his thoughts about me .
He wrote about my strengths , weaknesses , and gentle suggestions for improvement , quoting specific incidents , and held a mirror to my life .
After he died , I realized that no one writes to me anymore .
Handwriting is a disappearing art .
Im all for email and thinking while typing , but why give up old habits for new ?
Why cant we have letter writing and email exchange in our lives ?
There are times when I want to trade all those years that I was too busy to sit with my dad and chat with him , and trade all those years for one hug .
But too late .
But thats when I take out his letters and I read them , and the paper that touched his hand is in mine , and I feel connected to him .
So maybe we all need to leave our children with a value legacy , and not a financial one .
A value for things with a personal touch  -  -  an autograph book , a soul - searching letter .
If a fraction of this powerful TED audience could be inspired to buy a beautiful paper  -  -  John , itll be a recycled one  -  -  and write a beautiful letter to someone they love , we actually may start a revolution where our children may go to penmanship classes .
So what do I plan to leave for my son ?
I collect autograph books , and those of you authors in the audience know I hound you for them  -  -  and CDs too , Tracy .
I plan to publish my own notebook .
As I witnessed my fathers body being swallowed by fire , I sat by his funeral pyre and wrote .
I have no idea how Im going to do it , but I am committed to compiling his thoughts and mine into a book , and leave that published book for my son .
Id like to end with a few verses of what I wrote at my fathers cremation .
And those linguists , please pardon the grammar , because Ive not looked at it in the last 10 years .
I took it out for the first time to come here .
 Picture in a frame , ashes in a bottle , boundless energy confined in the bottle , forcing me to deal with reality , forcing me to deal with being grown up .
I hear you and I know that you would want me to be strong , but right now , I am being sucked down , surrounded and suffocated by these raging emotional waters , craving to cleanse my soul , trying to emerge on a firm footing one more time , to keep on fighting and flourishing just as you taught me .
Your encouraging whispers in my whirlpool of despair , holding me and heaving me to shores of sanity , to live again and to love again . 
Thank you .
Sergey Brin : Why Google Glass ?
Its not a demo , more of a philosophical argument : Why did Sergey Brin and his team at Google want to build an eye - mounted camera / computer , codenamed Glass ? Onstage at TED2013 , Brin calls for a new way of seeing our relationship with our mobile computers  -  -  not hunched over a screen but meeting the world heads - up .
Okay , its great to be back at TED .
Why dont I just start by firing away with the video ?
Okay , Glass , record a video .
This is it . Were on in two minutes .
Okay Glass , hang out with The Flying Club .
Google  photos of tiger heads .  Hmm .
You ready ? You ready ?
Right there . Okay , Glass , take a picture .
Go !
Man 6 : Holy  beep  ! That is awesome .
Whoa ! Look at that snake !
Woman 3 : Okay , Glass , record a video !
Man 7 : After this bridge , first exit .
Man 8 : Okay , A12 , right there !
Man 9 : Google , say  delicious  in Thai .
Google Glass : อร ่ อยMan 9 : Mmm , อร ่ อย .
Woman 4 : Google  jellyfish . 
Man 10 : Its beautiful .
Sergey Brin : Oh , sorry , I just got this message from a Nigerian prince .
He needs help getting 10 million dollars .
I like to pay attention to these because thats how we originally funded the company , and its gone pretty well .
Though in all seriousness , this position that you just saw me in , looking down at my phone , thats one of the reasons behind this project , Project Glass .
Because we ultimately questioned whether this is the ultimate future of how you want to connect to other people in your life , how you want to connect to information .
Should it be by just walking around looking down ?
But that was the vision behind Glass , and thats why weve created this form factor .
Okay . And I dont want to go through all the things it does and whatnot , but I want to tell you a little bit more about the motivation behind what led to it .
In addition to potentially socially isolating yourself when youre out and about looking at your phone , its kind of , is this what youre meant to do with your body ?
Youre standing around there and youre just rubbing this featureless piece of glass .
Youre just kind of moving around .
So when we developed Glass , we thought really about , can we make something that frees your hands ?
You saw all of the things people are doing in the video back there .
They were all wearing Glass , and thats how we got that footage .
And also you want something that frees your eyes .
Thats why we put the display up high , out of your line of sight , so it wouldnt be where youre looking and it wouldnt be where youre making eye contact with people .
And also we wanted to free up the ears , so the sound actually goes through , conducts straight to the bones in your cranium , which is a little bit freaky at first , but you get used to it .
And ironically , if you want to hear it better , you actually just cover your ear , which is kind of surprising , but thats how it works .
My vision when we started Google 15 years ago was that eventually you wouldnt have to have a search query at all .
Youd just have information come to you as you needed it .
And this is now , 15 years later , sort of the first form factor that I think can deliver that vision when youre out and about on the street talking to people and so forth .
This project has lasted now , been just over two years .
Weve learned an amazing amount .
Its been really important to make it comfortable .
So our first prototypes we built were huge .
It was like cell phones strapped to your head .
It was very heavy , pretty uncomfortable .
We had to keep it secret from our industrial designer until she actually accepted the job , and then she almost ran away screaming .
But weve come a long way .
And the other really unexpected surprise was the camera .
Our original prototypes didnt have cameras at all , but its been really magical to be able to capture moments spent with my family , my kids .
I just never would have dug out a camera or a phone or something else to take that moment .
And lastly Ive realized , in experimenting with this device , that I also kind of have a nervous tic .
The cell phone is  -  -  yeah , you have to look down on it and all that , but its also kind of a nervous habit .
Like if I smoked , Id probably just smoke instead .
I would just light up a cigarette . It would look cooler .
You know , Id be like  -  -  But in this case , you know , I whip this out and I sit there and look as if I have something very important to do or attend to .
But it really opened my eyes to how much of my life I spent just secluding away , be it email or social posts or whatnot , even though it wasnt really  -  -  theres nothing really that important or that pressing .
And with this , I know I will get certain messages if I really need them , but I dont have to be checking them all the time .
Yeah , Ive really enjoyed actually exploring the world more , doing more of the crazy things like you saw in the video .
Thank you all very much .
Brené Brown : Listening to shame
Shame is an unspoken epidemic , the secret behind many forms of broken behavior . Brené Brown , whose earlier talk on vulnerability became a viral hit , explores what can happen when people confront their shame head - on . Her own humor , humanity and vulnerability shine through every word .
Im going to tell you a little bit about my TEDxHouston Talk .
I woke up the morning after I gave that Talk with the worst vulnerability hangover of my life .
And I actually didnt leave my house for about three days .
The first time I left was to meet a friend for lunch .
And when I walked in , she was already at the table .
And I sat down , and she said ,  God , you look like hell . 
I said ,  Thanks . I feel really  -  -  Im not functioning . 
And she said ,  Whats going on ? 
And I said ,  I just told 500 people that I became a researcher to avoid vulnerability .
And that when being vulnerable emerged from my data , as absolutely essential to whole - hearted living , I told these 500 people that I had a breakdown .
I had a slide that said Breakdown .
At what point did I think that was a good idea ? 
And she said ,  I saw your Talk live - streamed .
It was not really you .
It was a little different than what you usually do .
But it was great . 
And I said ,  This cant happen .
YouTube , theyre putting this thing on YouTube .
And were going to be talking about 600 , 700 people . 
And she said ,  Well , I think its too late . 
And I said ,  Let me ask you something . 
And she said ,  Yeah . 
And I said ,  Do you remember when we were in college and really wild and kind of dumb ? 
And she said ,  Yeah . 
And I said ,  Remember when wed leave a really bad message on our ex - boyfriends answering machine ?
Then wed have to break into his dorm room and then erase the tape ? 
And she goes ,  Uh ... no . 
So of course , the only thing I could think of to say at that point was ,  Yeah , me neither .
That ... me neither . 
And Im thinking to myself ,  Brene , what are you doing ? What are you doing ?
Why did you bring this up ? Have you lost your mind ?
Your sisters would be perfect for this . 
So I looked back up and she said ,  Are you really going to try to break in and steal the video before they put it on YouTube ? 
And I said ,  Im just thinking about it a little bit . 
She said ,  Youre like the worst vulnerability role model ever . 
And then I looked at her and I said something that at the time felt a little dramatic , but ended up being more prophetic than dramatic .
I said ,  If 500 turns into 1,000 or 2,000 , my life is over . 
I had no contingency plan for four million .
And my life did end when that happened .
And maybe the hardest part about my life ending is that I learned something hard about myself , and that was that , as much as I would frustrated about not being able to get my work out to the world , there was a part of me that was working very hard to engineer staying small , staying right under the radar .
But I want to talk about what Ive learned .
Theres two things that Ive learned in the last year .
The first is vulnerability is not weakness .
And that myth is profoundly dangerous .
Let me ask you honestly  -  -  and Ill give you this warning , Im trained as a therapist , so I can out - wait you uncomfortably  -  -  so if you could just raise your hand that would be awesome  -  -  how many of you honestly , when youre thinking about doing something vulnerable or saying something vulnerable , think ,  God , vulnerabilitys weakness . This is weakness ? 
How many of you think of vulnerability and weakness synonymously ?
The majority of people .
Now let me ask you this question : This past week at TED , how many of you , when you saw vulnerability up here , thought it was pure courage ?
Vulnerability is not weakness .
I define vulnerability as emotional risk , exposure , uncertainty .
It fuels our daily lives .
And Ive come to the belief  -  -  this is my 12th year doing this research  -  -  that vulnerability is our most accurate measurement of courage  -  -  to be vulnerable , to let ourselves be seen , to be honest .
One of the weird things thats happened is , after the TED explosion , I got a lot of offers to speak all over the country  -  -  everyone from schools and parent meetings to Fortune 500 companies .
And so many of the calls went like this ,  Hey , Dr . Brown . We loved your TEDTalk .
Wed like you to come in and speak .
Wed appreciate it if you wouldnt mention vulnerability or shame . 
What would you like for me to talk about ?
Theres three big answers .
This is mostly , to be honest with you , from the business sector : innovation , creativity and change .
So let me go on the record and say , vulnerability is the birthplace of innovation , creativity and change .
To create is to make something that has never existed before .
Theres nothing more vulnerable than that .
Adaptability to change is all about vulnerability .
The second thing , in addition to really finally understanding the relationship between vulnerability and courage , the second thing I learned is this : We have to talk about shame .
And Im going to be really honest with you .
When I became a  vulnerability researcher  and that became the focus because of the TEDTalk  -  -  and Im not kidding .
Ill give you an example .
About three months ago , I was in a sporting goods store buying goggles and shin guards and all the things that parents buy at the sporting goods store .
About from a hundred feet away , this is what I hear :  Vulnerability TED ! Vulnerability TED ! 
Im a fifth generation Texan .
Our family motto is  Lock and load . 
I am not a natural vulnerability researcher .
So Im like , just keep walking , shes on my six .
And then I hear ,  Vulnerability TED ! 
I turn around , I go ,  Hi . 
Shes right here and she said ,  Youre the shame researcher who had the breakdown . 
At this point parents are , like , pulling their children close .
 Look away . 
And Im so worn out at this point in my life , I look at her and I actually say ,  It was a frickin spiritual awakening . 
And she looks back and does this ,  I know . 
And she said ,  We watched your TEDTalk in my book club .
Then we read your book and we renamed ourselves The Breakdown Babes .  And she said ,  Our tagline is : Were falling apart and it feels fantastic .  You can only imagine what its like for me in a faculty meeting .
So when I became Vulnerability TED , like an action figure  -  -  like Ninja Barbie , but Im Vulnerability TED  -  -  I thought , Im going to leave that shame stuff behind , because I spent six years studying shame before I really started writing and talking about vulnerability .
And I thought , thank God , because shame is this horrible topic , no one wants to talk about it .
Its the best way to shut people down on an airplane .
 What do you do ?   I study shame .   Oh . 
And I see you .
But in surviving this last year , I was reminded of a cardinal rule  -  -  not a research rule , but a moral imperative from my upbringing  -  -  youve got to dance with the one who brung ya .
And I did not learn about vulnerability and courage and creativity and innovation from studying vulnerability .
I learned about these things from studying shame .
And so I want to walk you in to shame .
Jungian analysts call shame the swampland of the soul .
And were going to walk in .
And the purpose is not to walk in and construct a home and live there .
It is to put on some galoshes and walk through and find our way around .
Heres why .
We heard the most compelling call ever to have a conversation in this country , and I think globally , around race , right ?
Yes ? We heard that .
Yes ?
can not have that conversation without shame , because you can not talk about race without talking about privilege .
And when people start talking about privilege , they get paralyzed by shame .
We heard a brilliant simple solution to not killing people in surgery , which is have a checklist .
You cant fix that problem without addressing shame , because when they teach those folks how to suture , they also teach them how to stitch their self - worth to being all - powerful .
And all - powerful folks dont need checklists .
And I had to write down the name of this TED Fellow so I didnt mess it up here .
Myshkin Ingawale , I hope I did right by you .
I saw the TED Fellows my first day here .
And he got up and he explained how he was driven to create some technology to help test for anemia because people were dying unnecessarily .
And he said ,  I saw this need .
So you know what I did ? I made it . 
And everybody just burst into applause , and they were like  Yes ! 
And he said ,  And it didnt work .
And then I made it 32 more times , and then it worked . 
You know what the big secret about TED is ?
I cant wait to tell people this .
I guess Im doing it right now .
This is like the failure conference .
No , it is .
You know why this place is amazing ?
Because very few people here are afraid to fail .
And no one who gets on the stage , so far that Ive seen , has not failed .
Ive failed miserably , many times .
I dont think the world understands that because of shame .
Theres a great quote that saved me this past year by Theodore Roosevelt .
A lot of people refer to it as the  Man in the Arena  quote .
And it goes like this :  It is not the critic who counts .
It is not the man who sits and points out how the doer of deeds could have done things better and how he falls and stumbles .
The credit goes to the man in the arena whose face is marred with dust and blood and sweat .
But when hes in the arena , at best he wins , and at worst he loses , but when he fails , when he loses , he does so daring greatly . 
And thats what this conference , to me , is about .
Thats what life is about , about daring greatly , about being in the arena .
When you walk up to that arena and you put your hand on the door , and you think ,  Im going in and Im going to try this ,  shame is the gremlin who says ,  Uh , uh .
Youre not good enough .
You never finished that MBA . Your wife left you .
I know your dad really wasnt in Luxembourg , he was in Sing Sing .
I know those things that happened to you growing up .
I know you dont think that youre pretty enough or smart enough or talented enough or powerful enough .
I know your dad never paid attention , even when you made CFO . 
Shame is that thing .
And if we can quiet it down and walk in and say ,  Im going to do this ,  we look up and the critic that we see pointing and laughing , 99 percent of the time is who ?
Us .
Shame drives two big tapes  -  -   never good enough  and , if you can talk it out of that one ,  who do you think you are ? 
The thing to understand about shame is its not guilt .
Shame is a focus on self , guilt is a focus on behavior .
Shame is  I am bad . 
Guilt is  I did something bad . 
How many of you , if you did something that was hurtful to me , would be willing to say ,  Im sorry . I made a mistake ? 
How many of you would be willing to say that ?
Guilt : Im sorry . I made a mistake .
Shame : Im sorry . I am a mistake .
Theres a huge difference between shame and guilt .
And heres what you need to know .
Shame is highly , highly correlated with addiction , depression , violence , aggression , bullying , suicide , eating disorders .
And heres what you even need to know more .
Guilt , inversely correlated with those things .
The ability to hold something weve done or failed to do up against who we want to be is incredibly adaptive .
Its uncomfortable , but its adaptive .
The other thing you need to know about shame is its absolutely organized by gender .
If shame washes over me and washes over Chris , its going to feel the same .
Everyone sitting in here knows the warm wash of shame .
Were pretty sure that the only people who dont experience shame are people who have no capacity for connection or empathy .
Which means , yes , I have a little shame ; no , Im a sociopath .
So I would opt for , yes , you have a little shame .
Shame feels the same for men and women , but its organized by gender .
For women , the best example I can give you is Enjoli the commercial :  I can put the wash on the line , pack the lunches , hand out the kisses and be at work at five to nine .
I can bring home the bacon , fry it up in the pan and never let you forget youre a man . 
For women , shame is do it all , do it perfectly and never let them see you sweat .
I dont know how much perfume that commercial sold , but I guarantee you , it moved a lot of antidepressants and anti - anxiety meds .
Shame , for women , is this web of unobtainable , conflicting , competing expectations about who were supposed to be .
And its a straight - jacket .
For men , shame is not a bunch of competing , conflicting expectations .
Shame is one , do not be perceived as what ?
Weak .
I did not interview men for the first four years of my study .
And it wasnt until a man looked at me one day after a book signing , said ,  I love what you have to say about shame , Im curious why you didnt mention men . 
And I said ,  I dont study men . 
And he said ,  Thats convenient . 
And I said ,  Why ? 
And he said ,  Because you say to reach out , tell our story , be vulnerable .
But you see those books you just signed for my wife and my three daughters ? 
I said ,  Yeah . 
 Theyd rather me die on top of my white horse than watch me fall down .
When we reach out and be vulnerable we get the shit beat out of us .
And dont tell me its from the guys and the coaches and the dads , because the women in my life are harder on me than anyone else . 
So I started interviewing men and asking questions .
And what I learned is this : You show me a woman who can actually sit with a man in real vulnerability and fear , Ill show you a woman whos done incredible work .
You show me a man who can sit with a woman whos just had it , she cant do it all anymore , and his first response is not ,  I unloaded the dishwasher ,  but he really listens  -  -  because thats all we need  -  -  Ill show you a guy whos done a lot of work .
Shame is an epidemic in our culture .
And to get out from underneath it , to find our way back to each other , we have to understand how it affects us and how it affects the way were parenting , the way were working , the way were looking at each other .
Very quickly , some research by Mahalik at Boston College .
He asked , what do women need to do to conform to female norms ?
The top answers in this country : nice , thin , modest and use all available resources for appearance .
When he asked about men , what do men in this country need to do to conform with male norms , the answers were : always show emotional control , work is first , pursue status and violence .
If were going to find our way back to each other , we have to understand and know empathy , because empathys the antidote to shame .
If you put shame in a Petri dish , it needs three things to grow exponentially : secrecy , silence and judgment .
If you put the same amount of shame in a Petri dish and douse it with empathy , it cant survive .
The two most powerful words when were in struggle : me too .
And so Ill leave you with this thought .
If were going to find our way back to each other , vulnerability is going to be that path .
And I know its seductive to stand outside the arena , because I think I did it my whole life , and think to myself , Im going to go in there and kick some ass when Im bulletproof and when Im perfect .
And that is seductive .
But the truth is that never happens .
And even if you got as perfect as you could and as bulletproof as you could possibly muster when you got in there , thats not what we want to see .
We want you to go in .
We want to be with you and across from you .
And we just want , for ourselves and the people we care about and the people we work with , to dare greatly .
So thank you all very much . I really appreciate it .
Eric Whitacre : Virtual Choir Live
Composer and conductor Eric Whitacre has inspired millions by bringing together  virtual choirs ,  singers from many countries spliced together on video . Now , for the first time ever , he creates the experience in real time , as 32 singers from around the world Skype in to join an onstage choir for an epic performance of Whitacres  Cloudburst ,  based on a poem by Octavio Paz .
In 1991 I had maybe the most profound and transformative experience of my life .
I was in the third year of my seven - year undergraduate degree .
I took a couple victory laps in there .
And I was on a college choir tour up in Northern California , and we had stopped for the day after all day on the bus , and we were relaxing next to this beautiful idyllic lake in the mountains .
And there were crickets and birds and frogs making noise , and as we sat there , over the mountains coming in from the north were these Steven Spielbergian clouds rolling toward us , and as the clouds got about halfway over the valley , so help me God , every single animal in that place stopped making noise at the same time .
This electric hush , as if they could sense what was about to happen .
And then the clouds came over us , and then , boom ! This massive thunderclap , and sheets of rain .
It was just extraordinary , and when I came back home I found a poem by the Mexican poet Octavio Paz , and decided to set it to music , a piece for choir called  Cloudburst ,  which is the piece that well perform for you in just a moment .
Now fast forward to just three years ago .
And we released to YouTube this , the Virtual Choir Project , 185 singers from 12 different countries .
You can see my little video there conducting these people , alone in their dorm rooms or in their living rooms at home .
Two years ago , on this very stage , we premiered Virtual Choir 2 , 2,052 singers from 58 different countries , this time performing a piece that I had written called  Sleep . 
And then just last spring we released Virtual Choir 3 ,  Water Night ,  another piece that I had written , this time nearly 4,000 singers from 73 different countries .
And when I was speaking to Chris about the future of Virtual Choir and where we might be able to take this , he challenged me to push the technology as far as we possibly could .
Could we do this all in real time ?
Could we have people singing together in real time ?
And with the help of Skype , that is what we are going to attempt today .
Now , well perform  Cloudburst  for you .
The first half will be performed by the live singers here on stage .
Im joined by singers from Cal State Long Beach , Cal State Fullerton and Riverside Community College , some of the best amateur choirs in the country , and —  -  -  and in the second half of the piece , the virtual choir will join us , 30 different singers from 30 different countries .
Now , weve pushed the technology as far as it can go , but theres still less than a second of latency , but in musical terms , thats a lifetime .
We deal in milliseconds .
So what Ive done is , Ive adapted  Cloudburst  so that it embraces the latency and the performers sing into the latency instead of trying to be exactly together .
So with deep humility , and for your approval , we present  Cloudburst . 
 The rain ...   Eyes of shadow - water   eyes of well - water   eyes of dream - water .   Blue suns , green whirlwinds ,   birdbeaks of light pecking open   pomegranate stars .   But tell me , burnt earth , is there no water ?   Only blood , only dust ,   only naked footsteps on the thorns ?   The rain awakens ...   We must sleep with open eyes ,   we must dream with our hands ,   we must dream the dreams of a river seeking its course ,   of the sun dreaming its worlds .   We must dream aloud ,   we must sing till the song puts forth roots ,   trunk , branches , birds , stars .   We must find the lost word ,   and remember what the blood ,   the tides , the earth , and the body say ,   and return to the point of departure ...    Cloudburst  Octavio Paz   translation by Lysander Kemp , adapted by Eric Whitacre  Eric Whitacre : Beth . Annabelle , where are you ? Jacob .
Thank you .
Laura Trice : Remember to say thank you
In this deceptively simple 3 - minute talk , Dr . Laura Trice muses on the power of the magic words  thank you   -  -  to deepen a friendship , to repair a bond , to make sure another person knows what they mean to you . Try it .
Hi . Im here to talk to you about the importance of praise , admiration and thank you , and having it be specific and genuine .
And the way I got interested in this was , I noticed in myself , when I was growing up , and until about a few years ago , that I would want to say thank you to someone , I would want to praise them , I would want to take in their praise of me and Id just stop it .
And I asked myself , why ?
I felt shy , I felt embarrassed .
And then my question became , am I the only one who does this ?
So , I decided to investigate .
Im fortunate enough to work in the rehab facility , so I get to see people who are facing life and death with addiction .
And sometimes it comes down to something as simple as , their core wound is their father died without ever saying hes proud of them .
But then , they hear from all the family and friends that the father told everybody else that he was proud of him , but he never told the son .
Its because he didnt know that his son needed to hear it .
So my question is , why dont we ask for the things that we need ?
I know a gentleman , married for 25 years , whos longing to hear his wife say ,  Thank you for being the breadwinner , so I can stay home with the kids ,  but wont ask .
I know a woman whos good at this .
She , once a week , meets with her husband and says ,  Id really like you to thank me for all these things I did in the house and with the kids . 
And he goes ,  Oh , this is great , this is great . 
And praise really does have to be genuine , but she takes responsibility for that .
And a friend of mine , April , who Ive had since kindergarten , she thanks her children for doing their chores .
And she said ,  Why wouldnt I thank it , even though theyre supposed to do it ? 
So , the question is , why was I blocking it ?
Why were other people blocking it ?
Why can I say ,  Ill take my steak medium rare , I need size six shoes ,  but I wont say ,  Would you praise me this way ? 
And its because Im giving you critical data about me .
Im telling you where Im insecure .
Im telling you where I need your help .
And Im treating you , my inner circle , like youre the enemy .
Because what can you do with that data ?
You could neglect me .
You could abuse it .
Or you could actually meet my need .
And I took my bike into the bike store -  -  I love this  -  -  same bike , and theyd do something called  truing  the wheels .
The guy said ,  You know , when you true the wheels , its going to make the bike so much better . 
I get the same bike back , and theyve taken all the little warps out of those same wheels Ive had for two and a half years , and my bike is like new .
So , Im going to challenge all of you .
I want you to true your wheels : be honest about the praise that you need to hear .
What do you need to hear ? Go home to your wife  -  -  go ask her , what does she need ?
Go home to your husband  -  -  what does he need ?
Go home and ask those questions , and then help the people around you .
And its simple .
And why should we care about this ?
We talk about world peace .
How can we have world peace with different cultures , different languages ?
I think it starts household by household , under the same roof .
So , lets make it right in our own backyard .
And I want to thank all of you in the audience for being great husbands , great mothers , friends , daughters , sons .
And maybe somebodys never said that to you , but youve done a really , really good job .
And thank you for being here , just showing up and changing the world with your ideas .
Thank you .
Carter Emmart : A 3D atlas of the universe
For the last 12 years , Carter Emmart has been coordinating the efforts of scientists , artists and programmers to build a complete 3D visualization of our known universe . He demos this stunning tour and explains how its being shared with facilities around the world .
Its a great honor today to share with you The Digital Universe , which was created for humanity to really see where we are in the universe .
And so I think we can roll the video that we have .
 The Himalayas .  The flat horizon that weve evolved with has been a metaphor for the infinite : unbounded resources and unlimited capacity for disposal of waste .
It wasnt until we really left Earth , got above the atmosphere and had seen the horizon bend back on itself , that we could understand our planet as a limited condition .
The Digital Universe Atlas has been built at the American Museum of Natural History over the past 12 years .
We maintain that , put that together as a project to really chart the universe across all scales .
What we see here are satellites around the Earth and the Earth in proper registration against the universe , as we see .
NASA supported this work 12 years ago as part of the rebuilding of the Hayden Planetarium so that we would share this with the world .
The Digital Universe is the basis of our space show productions that we do  -  -  our main space shows in the dome .
But what you see here is the result of , actually , internships that we hosted with Linkoping University in Sweden .
Ive had 12 students work on this for their graduate work , and the result has been this software called Uniview and a company called SCISS in Sweden .
This software allows interactive use , so this actual flight path and movie that we see here was actually flown live .
I captured this live from my laptop in a cafe called Earth Matters on the Lower East Side of Manhattan , where I live , and it was done as a collaborative project with the Rubin Museum of Himalayan Art for an exhibit on comparative cosmology .
And so as we move out , we see continuously from our planet all the way out into the realm of galaxies , as we see here , light - travel time , giving you a sense of how far away we are .
As we move out , the light from these distant galaxies have taken so long , were essentially backing up into the past .
We back so far up were finally seeing a containment around us  -  -  the afterglow of the Big Bang .
This is the WMAP microwave background that we see .
Well fly outside it here , just to see this sort of containment .
If we were outside this , it would almost be meaningless , in the sense as before time .
But this our containment of the visible universe .
We know the universe is bigger than that which we can see .
Coming back quickly , we see here the radio sphere that we jumped out of in the beginning , but these are positions , the latest positions of exoplanets that weve mapped , and our sun here , obviously , with our own solar system .
What youre going to see  -  -  were going to have to jump in here pretty quickly between several orders of magnitude to get down to where we see the solar system  -  -  these are the paths of Voyager 1 , Voyager 2 , Pioneer 11 and Pioneer 10 , the first four spacecraft to have left the solar system .
Coming in closer , picking up Earth , orbit of the Moon , and we see the Earth .
This map can be updated , and we can add in new data .
I know Dr . Carolyn Porco is the camera P.I .
for the Cassini mission .
But here we see the complex trajectory of the Cassini mission color coded for different mission phases , ingeniously developed so that 45 encounters with the largest moon , Titan , which is larger that the planet Mercury , diverts the orbit into different parts of mission phase .
This software allows us to come close and look at parts of this .
This software can also be networked between domes .
We have a growing user base of this , and we network domes .
And we can network between domes and classrooms .
Were actually sharing tours of the universe with the first sub - Saharan planetarium in Ghana as well as new libraries that have been built in the ghettos in Columbia and a high school in Cambodia .
And the Cambodians have actually controlled the Hayden Planetarium from their high school .
This is an image from Saturday , photographed by the Aqua satellite , but through the Uniview software .
So youre seeing the edge of the Earth .
This is Nepal .
This is , in fact , right here is the valley of Lhasa , right here in Tibet .
But we can see the haze from fires and so forth in the Ganges valley down below in India .
This is Nepal and Tibet .
And just in closing , Id just like to say this beautiful world that we live on  -  -  here we see a bit of the snow so Id like to just say that what the world needs now is a sense of being able to look at ourselves in this much larger condition now and a much larger sense of what home is .
Because our home is the universe , and we are the universe , essentially .
We carry that in us .
And to be able to see our context in this larger sense at all scales helps us all , I think , in understanding where we are and who we are in the universe .
Thank you .
Esther Perel : The secret to desire in a long - term relationship
In long - term relationships , we often expect our beloved to be both best friend and erotic partner . But as Esther Perel argues , good  and committed sex draws on two conflicting needs : our need for security and our need for surprise . So how do you sustain desire ? With wit and eloquence , Perel lets us in on the mystery of erotic intelligence .
So , why does good sex so often fade , even for couples who continue to love each other as much as ever ?
And why does good intimacy not guarantee good sex , contrary to popular belief ?
Or , the next question would be , can we want what we already have ?
Thats the million - dollar question , right ?
And why is the forbidden so erotic ?
What is it about transgression that makes desire so potent ?
And why does sex make babies , and babies spell erotic disaster in couples ?
Its kind of the fatal erotic blow , isnt it ?
And when you love , how does it feel ?
And when you desire , how is it different ?
These are some of the questions that are at the center of my exploration on the nature of erotic desire and its concomitant dilemmas in modern love .
So I travel the globe , and what Im noticing is that everywhere where romanticism has entered , there seems to be a crisis of desire .
A crisis of desire , as in owning the wanting  -  -  desire as an expression of our individuality , of our free choice , of our preferences , of our identity  -  -  desire that has become a central concept as part of modern love and individualistic societies .
You know , this is the first time in the history of humankind where we are trying to experience sexuality in the long term , not because we want 14 children , for which we need to have even more because many of them wont make it , and not because it is exclusively a womans marital duty .
This is the first time that we want sex over time about pleasure and connection that is rooted in desire .
So what sustains desire , and why is it so difficult ?
And at the heart of sustaining desire in a committed relationship , I think is the reconciliation of two fundamental human needs .
On the one hand , our need for security , for predictability , for safety , for dependability , for reliability , for permanence  -  -  all these anchoring , grounding experiences of our lives that we call home .
But we also have an equally strong need  -  -  men and women  -  -  for adventure , for novelty , for mystery , for risk , for danger , for the unknown , for the unexpected , surprise  -  -  you get the gist  -  -  for journey , for travel .
So reconciling our need for security and our need for adventure into one relationship , or what we today like to call a passionate marriage , used to be a contradiction in terms .
Marriage was an economic institution in which you were given a partnership for life in terms of children and social status and succession and companionship .
But now we want our partner to still give us all these things , but in addition I want you to be my best friend and my trusted confidant and my passionate lover to boot , and we live twice as long .
So we come to one person , and we basically are asking them to give us what once an entire village used to provide : Give me belonging , give me identity , give me continuity , but give me transcendence and mystery and awe all in one .
Give me comfort , give me edge .
Give me novelty , give me familiarity .
Give me predictability , give me surprise .
So now we get to the existential reality of the story , right ?
Because I think , in some way  -  -  and Ill come back to that  -  -  but the crisis of desire is often a crisis of the imagination .
So why does good sex so often fade ?
What is the relationship between love and desire ?
How do they relate , and how do they conflict ?
Because therein lies the mystery of eroticism .
So if there is a verb , for me , that comes with love , its  to have . 
And if there is a verb that comes with desire , it is  to want . 
In love , we want to have , we want to know the beloved .
We want to minimize the distance . We want to contract that gap .
We want to neutralize the tensions . We want closeness .
But in desire , we tend to not really want to go back to the places weve already gone .
Forgone conclusion does not keep our interest .
In desire , we want an Other , somebody on the other side that we can go visit , that we can go spend some time with , that we can go see what goes on in their red light district .
In desire , we want a bridge to cross .
Or in other words , I sometimes say , fire needs air .
Desire needs space .
And when its said like that , its often quite abstract .
But then I took a question with me .
And Ive gone to more than 20 countries in the last few years with  Mating in Captivity ,  and I asked people , when do you find yourself most drawn to your partner ?
Not attracted sexually , per se , but most drawn .
And across culture , across religion , and across gender  -  -  except for one  -  -  there are a few answers that just keep coming back .
So the first group is : I am most drawn to my partner when she is away , when we are apart , when we reunite .
Basically , when I get back in touch with my ability to imagine myself with my partner , when my imagination comes back in the picture , and when I can root it in absence and in longing , which is a major component of desire .
But then the second group is even more interesting : I am most drawn to my partner when I see him in the studio , when she is onstage , when he is in his element , when shes doing something shes passionate about , when I see him at a party and other people are really drawn to him , when I see her hold court .
Basically , when I look at my partner radiant and confident , probably the biggest turn - on across the board .
Radiant , as in self - sustaining .
I look at this person  -  -  by the way , in desire people rarely talk about it , when we are blended into one , five centimeters from each other . I dont know in inches how much that is .
But its also not when the other person is that far apart that you no longer see them .
Its when Im looking at my partner from a comfortable distance , where this person that is already so familiar , so known , is momentarily once again somewhat mysterious , somewhat elusive .
And in this space between me and the other lies the erotic élan , lies that movement toward the other .
Because sometimes , as Proust says , mystery is not about traveling to new places , but its about looking with new eyes .
And so , when I see my partner on his own or her own , doing something in which they are enveloped , I look at this person and I momentarily get a shift in perception , and I stay open to the mysteries that are living right next to me .
And then , more importantly , in this description about the other or myself  -  -  its the same  -  -  what is most interesting is that there is no neediness in desire .
Nobody needs anybody .
There is no caretaking in desire .
Caretaking is mightily loving . Its a powerful anti - aphrodisiac .
I have yet to see somebody who is so turned on by somebody who needs them .
Wanting them is one thing . Needing them is a shutdown , and women have known that forever , because anything that will bring up parenthood will usually decrease the erotic charge .
For good reasons , right ?
And then the third group of answers usually would be when Im surprised , when we laugh together , as somebody said to me in the office today , when hes in his tux , so I said , you know , its either the tux or the cowboy boots .
But basically its when there is novelty .
But novelty isnt about new positions . It isnt a repertoire of techniques .
Novelty is , what parts of you do you bring out ?
What parts of you are just being seen ?
Because in some way one could say sex isnt something you do , eh ?
Sex is a place you go . Its a space you enter inside yourself and with another , or others .
So where do you go in sex ?
What parts of you do you connect to ?
What do you seek to express there ?
Is it a place for transcendence and spiritual union ?
Is it a place for naughtiness and is it a place to be safely aggressive ?
Is it a place where you can finally surrender and not have to take responsibility for everything ?
Is it a place where you can express your infantile wishes ?
What comes out there ? Its a language .
It isnt just a behavior .
And its the poetic of that language that Im interested in , which is why I began to explore this concept of erotic intelligence .
You know , animals have sex .
Its the pivot , its biology , its the natural instinct .
We are the only ones who have an erotic life , which means that its sexuality transformed by the human imagination .
We are the only ones who can make love for hours , have a blissful time , multiple orgasms , and touch nobody , just because we can imagine it .
We can hint at it . We dont even have to do it .
We can experience that powerful thing called anticipation , which is a mortar to desire , the ability to imagine it , as if its happening , to experience it as if its happening , while nothing is happening and everything is happening at the same time .
So when I began to think about eroticism , I began to think about the poetics of sex , and if I look at it as an intelligence , then its something that you cultivate .
What are the ingredients ? Imagination , playfulness , novelty , curiosity , mystery .
But the central agent is really that piece called the imagination .
But more importantly , for me to begin to understand who are the couples who have an erotic spark , what sustains desire , I had to go back to the original definition of eroticism , the mystical definition , and I went through it through a bifurcation by looking actually at trauma , which is the other side , and I looked at it looking at the community that I had grown up in , which was a community in Belgium , all Holocaust survivors , and in my community there were two groups : those who didnt die , and those who came back to life .
And those who didnt die lived often very tethered to the ground , could not experience pleasure , could not trust , because when youre vigilant , worried , anxious , and insecure , you cant lift your head to go and take off in space and be playful and safe and imaginative .
Those who came back to life were those who understood the erotic as an antidote to death .
They knew how to keep themselves alive .
And when I began to listen to the sexlessness of the couples that I work with , I sometimes would hear people say ,  I want more sex ,  but generally people want better sex , and better is to reconnect with that quality of aliveness , of vibrancy , of renewal , of vitality , of eros , of energy that sex used to afford them , or that theyve hoped it would afford them .
And so I began to ask a different question .
 I shut myself off when ...  began to be the question .
 I turn off my desires when ...  which is not the same question as ,  What turns me off is ...  and  You turn me off when ... 
And people began to say ,  I turn myself off when I feel dead inside , when I dont like my body , when I feel old , when I havent had time for myself , when I havent had a chance to even check in with you , when I dont perform well at work , when I feel low self esteem , when I dont have a sense of self - worth , when I dont feel like I have a right to want , to take , to receive pleasure . 
And then I began to ask the reverse question .
 I turn myself on when ...  Because most of the time , people like to ask the question ,  You turn me on , what turns me on ,  and Im out of the question . You know ?
Now , if you are dead inside , the other person can do a lot of things for Valentines .
It wont make a dent . There is nobody at the reception desk .
So I turn myself on when , I turn my desires , I wake up when ...
Now , in this paradox between love and desire , what seems to be so puzzling is that the very ingredients that nurture love  -  -  mutuality , reciprocity , protection , worry , responsibility for the other  -  -  are sometimes the very ingredients that stifle desire .
Because desire comes with a host of feelings that are not always such favorites of love : jealousy , possessiveness , aggression , power , dominance , naughtiness , mischief .
Basically most of us will get turned on at night by the very same things that we will demonstrate against during the day .
You know , the erotic mind is not very politically correct .
If everybody was fantasizing on a bed of roses , we wouldnt be having such interesting talks about this .
But no , in our mind up there are a host of things going on that we dont always know how to bring to the person that we love , because we think love comes with selflessness and in fact desire comes with a certain amount of selfishness in the best sense of the word : the ability to stay connected to ones self in the presence of another .
So I want to draw that little image for you , because this need to reconcile these two sets of needs , we are born with that .
Our need for connection , our need for separateness , or our need for security and adventure , or our need for togetherness and for autonomy , and if you think about the little kid who sits on your lap and who is cozily nested here and very secure and comfortable , and at some point all of us need to go out into the world to discover and to explore .
Thats the beginning of desire , that exploratory needs curiosity , discovery .
And then at some point they turn around and they look at you , and if you tell them ,  Hey kiddo , the worlds a great place . Go for it .
Theres so much fun out there ,  then they can turn away and they can experience connection and separateness at the same time .
They can go off in their imagination , off in their body , off in their playfulness , all the while knowing that theres somebody when they come back .
But if on this side there is somebody who says ,  Im worried . Im anxious . Im depressed .
My partner hasnt taken care of me in so long .
Whats so good out there ? Dont we have everything you need together , you and I ? 
then there are a few little reactions that all of us can pretty much recognize .
Some of us will come back , came back a long time ago , and that little child who comes back is the child who will forgo a part of himself in order not to lose the other .
I will lose my freedom in order not to lose connection .
And I will learn to love in a certain way that will become burdened with extra worry and extra responsibility and extra protection , and I wont know how to leave you in order to go play , in order to go experience pleasure , in order to discover , to enter inside myself .
Translate this into adult language .
It starts very young . It continues into our sex lives up to the end .
Child number two comes back but looks like that over their shoulder all the time .
 Are you going to be there ?
Are you going to curse me ? Are you going to scold me ?
Are you going to be angry with me ? 
And they may be gone , but theyre never really away , and those are often the people that will tell you , in the beginning it was super hot .
Because in the beginning , the growing intimacy wasnt yet so strong that it actually led to the decrease of desire .
The more connected I became , the more responsible I felt , the less I was able to let go in your presence .
The third child doesnt really come back .
So what happens , if you want to sustain desire , its that real dialectic piece .
On the one hand you want the security in order to be able to go .
On the other hand if you cant go , you cant have pleasure , you cant culminate , you dont have an orgasm , you dont get excited because you spend your time in the body and the head of the other and not in your own .
So in this dilemma about reconciling these two sets of fundamental needs , there are a few things that Ive come to understand erotic couples do .
One , they have a lot of sexual privacy .
They understand that there is an erotic space that belongs to each of them .
They also understand that foreplay is not something you do five minutes before the real thing .
Foreplay pretty much starts at the end of the previous orgasm .
They also understand that an erotic space isnt about , you begin to stroke the other .
Its about you create a space where you leave Management Inc . , maybe where you leave the agile program , and you actually just enter that place where you stop being the good citizen who is taking care of things and being responsible .
Responsibility and desire just butt heads .
They dont really do well together .
Erotic couples also understand that passion waxes and wanes .
Its pretty much like the moon . It has intermittent eclipses .
But what they know is they know how to resurrect it .
They know how to bring it back , and they know how to bring it back because they have demystified one big myth , which is the myth of spontaneity , which is that its just going to fall from heaven while youre folding the laundry like a deus ex machina , and in fact they understood that whatever is going to just happen in a long - term relationship already has .
Committed sex is premeditated sex .
Its willful . Its intentional .
Its focus and presence .
Merry Valentines .
Nalini Nadkarni : Life science in prison
Nalini Nadkarni challenges our perspective on trees and prisons  -  -  she says both can be more dynamic than we think . Through a partnership with the state of Washington , she brings science classes and conservation programs to inmates , with unexpected results .
Trees epitomize stasis .
Trees are rooted in the ground in one place for many human generations , but if we shift our perspective from the trunk to the twigs , trees become very dynamic entities , moving and growing .
And I decided to explore this movement by turning trees into artists .
I simply tied the end of a paintbrush onto a twig .
I waited for the wind to come up and held up a canvas , and that produced art .
The piece of art you see on your left is painted by a western red cedar and that on your right by a Douglas fir , and what I learned was that different species have different signatures , like a Picasso versus a Monet .
But I was also interested in the movement of trees and how this art might let me capture that and quantify it , so to measure the distance that a single vine maple tree  -  -  which produced this painting  -  -  moved in a single year , I simply measured and summed each of those lines .
I multiplied them by the number of twigs per branch and the number of branches per tree and then divided that by the number of minutes per year .
And so I was able to calculate how far a single tree moved in a single year .
You might have a guess .
The answer is actually 186,540 miles , or seven times around the globe .
And so simply by shifting our perspective from a single trunk to the many dynamic twigs , we are able to see that trees are not simply static entities , but rather extremely dynamic .
And I began to think about ways that we might consider this lesson of trees , to consider other entities that are also static and stuck , but which cry for change and dynamicism , and one of those entities is our prisons .
Prisons , of course , are where people who break our laws are stuck , confined behind bars .
And our prison system itself is stuck .
The United States has over 2.3 million incarcerated men and women .
That number is rising .
Of the 100 incarcerated people that are released , 60 will return to prison .
Funds for education , for training and for rehabilitation are declining , so this despairing cycle of incarceration continues .
I decided to ask whether the lesson I had learned from trees as artists could be applied to a static institution such as our prisons , and I think the answer is yes .
In the year 2007 , I started a partnership with the Washington State Department of Corrections .
Working with four prisons , we began bringing science and scientists , sustainability and conservation projects to four state prisons .
We give science lectures , and the men here are choosing to come to our science lectures instead of watching television or weightlifting .
That , I think , is movement .
We partnered with the Nature Conservancy for inmates at Stafford Creek Correctional Center to grow endangered prairie plants for restoration of relic prairie areas in Washington state .
That , I think , is movement .
We worked with the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife to grow endangered frogs  -  -  the Oregon spotted frog  -  -  for later release into protected wetlands .
That , I think , is movement .
And just recently , weve begun to work with those men who are segregated in what we call Supermax facilities .
Theyve incurred violent infractions by becoming violent with guards and with other prisoners .
Theyre kept in bare cells like this for 23 hours a day .
When they have meetings with their review boards or mental health professionals , theyre placed in immobile booths like this .
For one hour a day theyre brought to these bleak and bland exercise yards .
Although we cant bring trees and prairie plants and frogs into these environments , we are bringing images of nature into these exercise yards , putting them on the walls , so at least they get contact with visual images of nature .
This is Mr. Lopez , who has been in solitary confinement for 18 months , and hes providing input on the types of images that he believes would make him and his fellow inmates more serene , more calm , less apt to violence .
And so what we see , I think , is that small , collective movements of change can perhaps move an entity such as our own prison system in a direction of hope .
We know that trees are static entities when we look at their trunks .
But if trees can create art , if they can encircle the globe seven times in one year , if prisoners can grow plants and raise frogs , then perhaps there are other static entities that we hold inside ourselves , like grief , like addictions , like racism , that can also change .
Thank you very much .
Sleepy Man Banjo Boys : Bluegrass virtuosity from ... New Jersey ?
All under the age of 16 , brothers Jonny , Robbie and Tommy Mizzone are from New Jersey , a US state thats better known for the rock of Bruce Springsteen than the bluegrass of Earl Scruggs . Nonetheless , the siblings began performing bluegrass covers , as well as their own compositions , at a young age . Here , they play three dazzling songs in three different keys , passing the lead back and forth from fiddle to banjo to guitar .
Robbie Mizzone : Thank you .
Tommy Mizzone : Thank you very much .
Were so excited to be here . Its such an honor for us .
Like he said , were three brothers from New Jersey  -  -  you know , the bluegrass capital of the world .
We discovered bluegrass a few years ago , and we fell in love with it . We hope you guys will too .
This next song is an original we wrote called  Timelapse ,  and it will probably live up to its name .
TM : Thank you very much .
RM : Im just going to take a second to introduce the band .
On guitar is my 15 - year - old brother Tommy .
On banjo is 10 - year - old Jonny .
Hes also our brother .
And Im Robbie , and Im 14 , and I play the fiddle .
As you can see , we decided to make it hard on ourselves , and we chose to play three songs in three different keys .
Yeah . Im also going to explain , a lot of people want to know where we got the name Sleepy Man Banjo Boys from .
So it started when Jonny was little , and he first started the banjo , he would play on his back with his eyes closed , and wed say it looked like he was sleeping .
So you can probably piece the rest together .
TM : We cant really figure out the reason for this .
It might have been that it weighs about a million pounds .
TM : Thank you very much .
RM : Thank you .
Michael Hansmeyer : Building unimaginable shapes
Inspired by cell division , Michael Hansmeyer writes algorithms that design outrageously fascinating shapes and forms with millions of facets . No person could draft them by hand , but theyre buildable  -  -  and they could revolutionize the way we think of architectural form .
As an architect , I often ask myself , what is the origin of the forms that we design ?
What kind of forms could we design if we wouldnt work with references anymore ?
If we had no bias , if we had no preconceptions , what kind of forms could we design if we could free ourselves from our experience ?
If we could free ourselves from our education ?
What would these unseen forms look like ?
Would they surprise us ? Would they intrigue us ?
Would they delight us ?
If so , then how can we go about creating something that is truly new ?
I propose we look to nature .
Nature has been called the greatest architect of forms .
And Im not saying that we should copy nature , Im not saying we should mimic biology , instead I propose that we can borrow natures processes .
We can abstract them and to create something that is new .
Natures main process of creation , morphogenesis , is the splitting of one cell into two cells .
And these cells can either be identical , or they can be distinct from each other through asymmetric cell division .
If we abstract this process , and simplify it as much as possible , then we could start with a single sheet of paper , one surface , and we could make a fold and divide the surface into two surfaces .
Were free to choose where we make the fold .
And by doing so , we can differentiate the surfaces .
Through this very simple process , we can create an astounding variety of forms .
Now , we can take this form and use the same process to generate three - dimensional structures , but rather than folding things by hand , well bring the structure into the computer , and code it as an algorithm .
And in doing so , we can suddenly fold anything .
We can fold a million times faster , we can fold in hundreds and hundreds of variations .
And as were seeking to make something three - dimensional , we start not with a single surface , but with a volume .
A simple volume , the cube .
If we take its surfaces and fold them again and again and again and again , then after 16 iterations , 16 steps , we end up with 400,000 surfaces and a shape that looks , for instance , like this .
And if we change where we make the folds , if we change the folding ratio , then this cube turns into this one .
We can change the folding ratio again to produce this shape , or this shape .
So we exert control over the form by specifying the position of where were making the fold , but essentially youre looking at a folded cube .
And we can play with this .
We can apply different folding ratios to different parts of the form to create local conditions .
We can begin to sculpt the form .
And because were doing the folding on the computer , we are completely free of any physical constraints .
So that means that surfaces can intersect themselves , they can become impossibly small .
We can make folds that we otherwise could not make .
Surfaces can become porous .
They can stretch . They can tear .
And all of this expounds the scope of forms that we can produce .
But in each case , I didnt design the form .
I designed the process that generated the form .
In general , if we make a small change to the folding ratio , which is what youre seeing here , then the form changes correspondingly .
But thats only half of the story  -  -  99.9 percent of the folding ratios produce not this , but this , the geometric equivalent of noise .
The forms that I showed before were made actually through very long trial and error .
A far more effective way to create forms , I have found , is to use information that is already contained in forms .
A very simple form such as this one actually contains a lot of information that may not be visible to the human eye .
So , for instance , we can plot the length of the edges .
White surfaces have long edges , black ones have short ones .
We can plot the planarity of the surfaces , their curvature , how radial they are  -  -  all information that may not be instantly visible to you , but that we can bring out , that we can articulate , and that we can use to control the folding .
So now Im not specifying a single ratio anymore to fold it , but instead Im establishing a rule , Im establishing a link between a property of a surface and how that surface is folded .
And because Ive designed the process and not the form , I can run the process again and again and again to produce a whole family of forms .
These forms look elaborate , but the process is a very minimal one .
There is a simple input , its always a cube that I start with , and its a very simple operation  -  -  its making a fold , and doing this over and over again .
So lets bring this process to architecture .
How ? And at what scale ?
I chose to design a column .
Columns are architectural archetypes .
Theyve been used throughout history to express ideals about beauty , about technology .
A challenge to me was how we could express this new algorithmic order in a column .
I started using four cylinders .
Through a lot of experimentation , these cylinders eventually evolved into this .
And these columns , they have information at very many scales .
We can begin to zoom into them .
The closer one gets , the more new features one discovers .
Some formations are almost at the threshold of human visibility .
And unlike traditional architecture , its a single process that creates both the overall form and the microscopic surface detail .
These forms are undrawable .
An architect whos drawing them with a pen and a paper would probably take months , or it would take even a year to draw all the sections , all of the elevations , you can only create something like this through an algorithm .
The more interesting question , perhaps , is , are these forms imaginable ?
Usually , an architect can somehow envision the end state of what he is designing .
In this case , the process is deterministic .
Theres no randomness involved at all , but its not entirely predictable .
Theres too many surfaces , theres too much detail , one cant see the end state .
So this leads to a new role for the architect .
One needs a new method to explore all of the possibilities that are out there .
For one thing , one can design many variants of a form , in parallel , and one can cultivate them .
And to go back to the analogy with nature , one can begin to think in terms of populations , one can talk about permutations , about generations , about crossing and breeding to come up with a design .
And the architect is really , he moves into the position of being an orchestrator of all of these processes .
But enough of the theory .
At one point I simply wanted to jump inside this image , so to say , I bought these red and blue 3D glasses , got up very close to the screen , but still that wasnt the same as being able to walk around and touch things .
So there was only one possibility  -  -  to bring the column out of the computer .
Theres been a lot of talk now about 3D printing .
For me , or for my purpose at this moment , theres still too much of an unfavorable tradeoff between scale , on the one hand , and resolution and speed , on the other .
So instead , we decided to take the column , and we decided to build it as a layered model , made out of very many slices , thinly stacked over each other .
What youre looking at here is an X - ray of the column that you just saw , viewed from the top .
Unbeknownst to me at the time , because we had only seen the outside , the surfaces were continuing to fold themselves , to grow on the inside of the column , which was quite a surprising discovery .
From this shape , we calculated a cutting line , and then we gave this cutting line to a laser cutter to produce  -  -  and youre seeing a segment of it here  -  -  very many thin slices , individually cut , on top of each other .
And this is a photo now , its not a rendering , and the column that we ended up with after a lot of work , ended up looking remarkably like the one that we had designed in the computer .
Almost all of the details , almost all of the surface intricacies were preserved .
But it was very labor intensive .
Theres a huge disconnect at the moment still between the virtual and the physical .
It took me several months to design the column , but ultimately it takes the computer about 30 seconds to calculate all of the 16 million faces .
The physical model , on the other hand , is 2,700 layers , one millimeter thick , it weighs 700 kilos , its made of sheet that can cover this entire auditorium .
And the cutting path that the laser followed goes from here to the airport and back again .
But it is increasingly possible .
Machines are getting faster , its getting less expensive , and theres some promising technological developments just on the horizon .
These are images from the Gwangju Biennale .
And in this case , I used ABS plastic to produce the columns , we used the bigger , faster machine , and they have a steel core inside , so theyre structural , they can bear loads for once .
Each column is effectively a hybrid of two columns .
You can see a different column in the mirror , if theres a mirror behind the column that creates a sort of an optical illusion .
So where does this leave us ?
I think this project gives us a glimpse of the unseen objects that await us if we as architects begin to think about designing not the object , but a process to generate objects .
Ive shown one simple process that was inspired by nature ; theres countless other ones .
In short , we have no constraints .
Instead , we have processes in our hands right now that allow us to create structures at all scales that we couldnt even have dreamt up .
And , if I may add , at one point we will build them .
Thank you .
David Hoffman : Sputnik mania
Filmmaker David Hoffman shares footage from his feature - length documentary Sputnik Mania , which shows how the Soviet Unions launch of Sputnik in 1957 led to both the space race and the arms race  -  -  and jump - started science and math education around the world .
Fifty years ago in the old Soviet Union , a team of engineers was secretly moving a large object through a desolate countryside .
With it , they were hoping to capture the minds of people everywhere by being the first to conquer outer space .
The rocket was huge .
And packed in its nose was a silver ball with two radios inside .
On October 4 , 1957 , they launched their rocket .
One of the Russian scientists wrote at the time :  We are about to create a new planet that we will call Sputnik .
In the olden days , explorers like Vasco da Gama and Columbus had the good fortune to open up the terrestrial globe .
Now we have the good fortune to open up space .
And it is for those in the future to envy us our joy . 
Youre watching snippets from  Sputnik ,  my fifth documentary feature , which is just about completed .
It tells the story of Sputnik , and the story of what happened to America as a result .
For days after the launch , Sputnik was a wonderful curiosity .
A man - made moon visible by ordinary citizens , it inspired awe and pride that humans had finally launched an object into space .
But just three days later , on a day they called Red Monday , the media and the politicians told us , and we believed , that Sputnik was proof that our enemy had beaten us in science and technology , and that they could now attack us with hydrogen bombs , using their Sputnik rocket as an IBM missile .
All hell broke loose .
Sputnik quickly became one of the three great shocks to hit America  -  -  historians say the equal of Pearl Harbor or 9 / 11 .
It provoked the missile gap .
It exploded an arms race .
It began the space race .
Within a year , Congress funded huge weapons increases , and we went from 1,200 nuclear weapons to 20,000 .
And the reactions to Sputnik went far beyond weapons increases .
For example , some here will remember this day , June 1958 , the National Civil Defense Drill , where tens of millions of people in 78 cities went underground .
Or the Gallup Poll that showed that seven in 10 Americans believed that a nuclear war would happen , and that at least 50 percent of our population was going to be killed .
But Sputnik provoked wonderful changes as well .
For example , some in this room went to school on scholarship because of Sputnik .
Support for engineering , math and science  -  -  education in general  -  -  boomed .
And Vint Cerf points out that Sputnik led directly to ARPA , and the Internet , and , of course , NASA .
My feature documentary shows how a free society can be stampeded by those who know how to use media .
But it also shows how we can turn what appears at first to be a bad situation , into something that was overall very good for America .
 Sputnik  will soon be released .
In closing , I would like to take a moment to thank one of my investors : longtime TEDster , Jay Walker .
And Id like to thank you all .
Thank you , Chris .
Harish Manwani : Profits not always the point
You might not expect the chief operating officer of a major global corporation to look too far beyond either the balance sheet or the bottom line . But Harish Manwani , COO of Unilever , makes a passionate argument that doing so to include value , purpose and sustainability in top - level decision - making is not just savvy , its the only way to run a 21st century business responsibly .
The entire model of capitalism and the economic model that you and I did business in , and , in fact , continue to do business in , was built around what probably Milton Friedman put more succinctly .
And Adam Smith , of course , the father of modern economics actually said many , many years ago , the invisible hand , which is ,  If you continue to operate in your own self - interest you will do the best good for society . 
Now , capitalism has done a lot of good things and Ive talked about a lot of good things that have happened , but equally , it has not been able to meet up with some of the challenges that weve seen in society .
The model that at least I was brought up in and a lot of us doing business were brought up in was one which talked about what I call the three Gs of growth : growth that is consistent , quarter on quarter ; growth that is competitive , better than the other person ; and growth that is profitable , so you continue to make more and more shareholder value .
And Im afraid this is not going to be good enough and we have to move from this 3G model to a model of what I call the fourth G : the G of growth that is responsible .
And it is this that has to become a very important part of creating value .
Of not just creating economic value but creating social value .
And companies that will thrive are those that will actually embrace the fourth G .
And the model of 4G is quite simple : Companies can not afford to be just innocent bystanders in whats happening around in society .
They have to begin to play their role in terms of serving the communities which actually sustain them .
And we have to move to a model of an and / and model which is how do we make money and do good ?
How do we make sure that we have a great business but we also have a great environment around us ?
And that model is all about doing well and doing good .
But the question is easier said than done .
But how do we actually get that done ?
And I do believe that the answer to that is going to be leadership .
It is going to be to redefine the new business models which understand that the only license to operate is to combine these things .
And for that you need businesses that can actually define their role in society in terms of a much larger purpose than the products and brands that they sell .
And companies that actually define a true north , things that are nonnegotiable whether times are good , bad , ugly  -  -  doesnt matter .
There are things that you stand for .
Values and purpose are going to be the two drivers of software that are going to create the companies of tomorrow .
And Im going to now shift to talking a little bit about my own experiences .
I joined Unilever in 1976 as a management trainee in India .
And on my first day of work I walked in and my boss tells me ,  Do you know why youre here ? 
I said ,  Im here to sell a lot of soap . 
And he said ,  No , youre here to change lives . 
Youre here to change lives .
You know , I thought it was rather facetious .
We are a company that sells soap and soup .
What are we doing about changing lives ?
And its then I realized that simple acts like selling a bar of soap can save more lives than pharmaceutical companies .
I dont know how many of you know that five million children dont reach the age of five because of simple infections that can be prevented by an act of washing their hands with soap .
We run the largest hand - washing program in the world .
We are running a program on hygiene and health that now touches half a billion people .
Its not about selling soap , there is a larger purpose out there .
And brands indeed can be at the forefront of social change .
And the reason for that is , when two billion people use your brands thats the amplifier .
Small actions can make a big difference .
Take another example , I was walking around in one of our villages in India .
Now those of you who have done this will realize that this is no walk in the park .
And we had this lady who was one of our small distributors  -  -  beautiful , very , very modest , her home  -  -  and she was out there , dressed nicely , her husband in the back , her mother - in - law behind and her sister - in - law behind her .
The social order was changing because this lady is part of our Project Shakti that is actually teaching women how to do small business and how to carry the message of nutrition and hygiene .
We have 60,000 such women now in India .
Its not about selling soap , its about making sure that in the process of doing so you can change peoples lives .
Small actions , big difference .
Our R and D folks are not only working to give us some fantastic detergents , but theyre working to make sure we use less water .
A product that weve just launched recently , One Rinse product that allows you to save water every time you wash your clothes .
And if we can convert all our users to using this , thats 500 billion liters of water .
By the way , thats equivalent to one month of water for a whole huge continent .
So just think about it .
There are small actions that can make a big difference .
And I can go on and on .
Our food chain , our brilliant products  -  -  and Im sorry Im giving you a word from the sponsors  -  -  Knorr , Hellmans and all those wonderful products .
We are committed to making sure that all our agricultural raw materials are sourced from sustainable sources , 100 - percent sustainable sources .
We were the first to say we are going to buy all of our palm oil from sustainable sources .
I dont know how many of you know that palm oil , and not buying it from sustainable sources , can create deforestation that is responsible for 20 percent of the greenhouse gasses in the world .
We were the first to embrace that , and its all because we market soap and soup .
And the point Im making here is that companies like yours , companies like mine have to define a purpose which embraces responsibility and understands that we have to play our part in the communities in which we operate .
We introduced something called The Unilever Sustainable Living Plan , which said ,  Our purpose is to make sustainable living commonplace , and we are gong to change the lives of one billion people over 2020 . 
Now the question here is , where do we go from here ?
And the answer to that is very simple : Were not going to change the world alone .
There are plenty of you and plenty of us who understand this .
The question is , we need partnerships , we need coalitions and importantly , we need that leadership that will allow us to take this from here and to be the change that we want to see around us .
Thank you very much .
Susan Cain : The power of introverts
In a culture where being social and outgoing are prized above all else , it can be difficult , even shameful , to be an introvert . But , as Susan Cain argues in this passionate talk , introverts bring extraordinary talents and abilities to the world , and should be encouraged and celebrated .
When I was nine years old I went off to summer camp for the first time .
And my mother packed me a suitcase full of books , which to me seemed like a perfectly natural thing to do .
Because in my family , reading was the primary group activity .
And this might sound antisocial to you , but for us it was really just a different way of being social .
You have the animal warmth of your family sitting right next to you , but you are also free to go roaming around the adventureland inside your own mind .
And I had this idea that camp was going to be just like this , but better .
I had a vision of 10 girls sitting in a cabin cozily reading books in their matching nightgowns .
Camp was more like a keg party without any alcohol .
And on the very first day our counselor gathered us all together and she taught us a cheer that she said we would be doing every day for the rest of the summer to instill camp spirit .
And it went like this :  R - O - W - D - I - E , thats the way we spell rowdie .
Rowdie , rowdie , lets get rowdie . 
Yeah .
So I couldnt figure out for the life of me why we were supposed to be so rowdy , or why we had to spell this word incorrectly .
But I recited a cheer . I recited a cheer along with everybody else .
I did my best .
And I just waited for the time that I could go off and read my books .
But the first time that I took my book out of my suitcase , the coolest girl in the bunk came up to me and she asked me ,  Why are you being so mellow ?   -  -  mellow , of course , being the exact opposite of R - O - W - D - I - E .
And then the second time I tried it , the counselor came up to me with a concerned expression on her face and she repeated the point about camp spirit and said we should all work very hard to be outgoing .
And so I put my books away , back in their suitcase , and I put them under my bed , and there they stayed for the rest of the summer .
And I felt kind of guilty about this .
I felt as if the books needed me somehow , and they were calling out to me and I was forsaking them .
But I did forsake them and I didnt open that suitcase again until I was back home with my family at the end of the summer .
Now , I tell you this story about summer camp .
I could have told you 50 others just like it  -  -  all the times that I got the message that somehow my quiet and introverted style of being was not necessarily the right way to go , that I should be trying to pass as more of an extrovert .
And I always sensed deep down that this was wrong and that introverts were pretty excellent just as they were .
But for years I denied this intuition , and so I became a Wall Street lawyer , of all things , instead of the writer that I had always longed to be  -  -  partly because I needed to prove to myself that I could be bold and assertive too .
And I was always going off to crowded bars when I really would have preferred to just have a nice dinner with friends .
And I made these self - negating choices so reflexively , that I wasnt even aware that I was making them .
Now this is what many introverts do , and its our loss for sure , but it is also our colleagues loss and our communities loss .
And at the risk of sounding grandiose , it is the worlds loss .
Because when it comes to creativity and to leadership , we need introverts doing what they do best .
A third to a half of the population are introverts  -  -  a third to a half .
So thats one out of every two or three people you know .
So even if youre an extrovert yourself , Im talking about your coworkers and your spouses and your children and the person sitting next to you right now  -  -  all of them subject to this bias that is pretty deep and real in our society .
We all internalize it from a very early age without even having a language for what were doing .
Now to see the bias clearly you need to understand what introversion is .
Its different from being shy .
Shyness is about fear of social judgment .
Introversion is more about , how do you respond to stimulation , including social stimulation .
So extroverts really crave large amounts of stimulation , whereas introverts feel at their most alive and their most switched - on and their most capable when theyre in quieter , more low - key environments .
Not all the time  -  -  these things arent absolute  -  -  but a lot of the time .
So the key then to maximizing our talents is for us all to put ourselves in the zone of stimulation that is right for us .
But now heres where the bias comes in .
Our most important institutions , our schools and our workplaces , they are designed mostly for extroverts and for extroverts need for lots of stimulation .
And also we have this belief system right now that I call the new groupthink , which holds that all creativity and all productivity comes from a very oddly gregarious place .
So if you picture the typical classroom nowadays : When I was going to school , we sat in rows .
We sat in rows of desks like this , and we did most of our work pretty autonomously .
But nowadays , your typical classroom has pods of desks  -  -  four or five or six or seven kids all facing each other .
And kids are working in countless group assignments .
Even in subjects like math and creative writing , which you think would depend on solo flights of thought , kids are now expected to act as committee members .
And for the kids who prefer to go off by themselves or just to work alone , those kids are seen as outliers often or , worse , as problem cases .
And the vast majority of teachers reports believing that the ideal student is an extrovert as opposed to an introvert , even though introverts actually get better grades and are more knowledgeable , according to research .
Okay , same thing is true in our workplaces .
Now , most of us work in open plan offices , without walls , where we are subject to the constant noise and gaze of our coworkers .
And when it comes to leadership , introverts are routinely passed over for leadership positions , even though introverts tend to be very careful , much less likely to take outsize risks  -  -  which is something we might all favor nowadays .
And interesting research by Adam Grant at the Wharton School has found that introverted leaders often deliver better outcomes than extroverts do , because when they are managing proactive employees , theyre much more likely to let those employees run with their ideas , whereas an extrovert can , quite unwittingly , get so excited about things that theyre putting their own stamp on things , and other peoples ideas might not as easily then bubble up to the surface .
Now in fact , some of our transformative leaders in history have been introverts .
Ill give you some examples .
Eleanor Roosevelt , Rosa Parks , Gandhi  -  -  all these peopled described themselves as quiet and soft - spoken and even shy .
And they all took the spotlight , even though every bone in their bodies was telling them not to .
And this turns out to have a special power all its own , because people could feel that these leaders were at the helm , not because they enjoyed directing others and not out of the pleasure of being looked at ; they were there because they had no choice , because they were driven to do what they thought was right .
Now I think at this point its important for me to say that I actually love extroverts .
I always like to say some of my best friends are extroverts , including my beloved husband .
And we all fall at different points , of course , along the introvert / extrovert spectrum .
Even Carl Jung , the psychologist who first popularized these terms , said that theres no such thing as a pure introvert or a pure extrovert .
He said that such a man would be in a lunatic asylum , if he existed at all .
And some people fall smack in the middle of the introvert / extrovert spectrum , and we call these people ambiverts .
And I often think that they have the best of all worlds .
But many of us do recognize ourselves as one type or the other .
And what Im saying is that culturally we need a much better balance .
We need more of a yin and yang between these two types .
This is especially important when it comes to creativity and to productivity , because when psychologists look at the lives of the most creative people , what they find are people who are very good at exchanging ideas and advancing ideas , but who also have a serious streak of introversion in them .
And this is because solitude is a crucial ingredient often to creativity .
So Darwin , he took long walks alone in the woods and emphatically turned down dinner party invitations .
Theodor Geisel , better known as Dr . Seuss , he dreamed up many of his amazing creations in a lonely bell tower office that he had in the back of his house in La Jolla , California .
And he was actually afraid to meet the young children who read his books for fear that they were expecting him this kind of jolly Santa Claus - like figure and would be disappointed with his more reserved persona .
Steve Wozniak invented the first Apple computer sitting alone in his cubical in Hewlett - Packard where he was working at the time .
And he says that he never would have become such an expert in the first place had he not been too introverted to leave the house when he was growing up .
Now of course , this does not mean that we should all stop collaborating  -  -  and case in point , is Steve Wozniak famously coming together with Steve Jobs to start Apple Computer  -  -  but it does mean that solitude matters and that for some people it is the air that they breathe .
And in fact , we have known for centuries about the transcendent power of solitude .
Its only recently that weve strangely begun to forget it .
If you look at most of the worlds major religions , you will find seekers  -  -  Moses , Jesus , Buddha , Muhammad  -  -  seekers who are going off by themselves alone to the wilderness where they then have profound epiphanies and revelations that they then bring back to the rest of the community .
So no wilderness , no revelations .
This is no surprise though if you look at the insights of contemporary psychology .
It turns out that we cant even be in a group of people without instinctively mirroring , mimicking their opinions .
Even about seemingly personal and visceral things like who youre attracted to , you will start aping the beliefs of the people around you without even realizing that thats what youre doing .
And groups famously follow the opinions of the most dominant or charismatic person in the room , even though theres zero correlation between being the best talker and having the best ideas  -  -  I mean zero .
So ...
You might be following the person with the best ideas , but you might not .
And do you really want to leave it up to chance ?
Much better for everybody to go off by themselves , generate their own ideas freed from the distortions of group dynamics , and then come together as a team to talk them through in a well - managed environment and take it from there .
Now if all this is true , then why are we getting it so wrong ?
Why are we setting up our schools this way and our workplaces ?
And why are we making these introverts feel so guilty about wanting to just go off by themselves some of the time ?
One answer lies deep in our cultural history .
Western societies , and in particular the U.S . , have always favored the man of action over the man of contemplation and  man  of contemplation .
But in Americas early days , we lived in what historians call a culture of character , where we still , at that point , valued people for their inner selves and their moral rectitude .
And if you look at the self - help books from this era , they all had titles with things like  Character , the Grandest Thing in the World . 
And they featured role models like Abraham Lincoln who was praised for being modest and unassuming .
Ralph Waldo Emerson called him  A man who does not offend by superiority . 
But then we hit the 20th century and we entered a new culture that historians call the culture of personality .
What happened is we had evolved an agricultural economy to a world of big business .
And so suddenly people are moving from small towns to the cities .
And instead of working alongside people theyve known all their lives , now they are having to prove themselves in a crowd of strangers .
So , quite understandably , qualities like magnetism and charisma suddenly come to seem really important .
And sure enough , the self - help books change to meet these new needs and they start to have names like  How to Win Friends and Influence People . 
And they feature as their role models really great salesmen .
So thats the world were living in today .
Thats our cultural inheritance .
Now none of this is to say that social skills are unimportant , and Im also not calling for the abolishing of teamwork at all .
The same religions who send their sages off to lonely mountain tops also teach us love and trust .
And the problems that we are facing today in fields like science and in economics are so vast and so complex that we are going to need armies of people coming together to solve them working together .
But I am saying that the more freedom that we give introverts to be themselves , the more likely that they are to come up with their own unique solutions to these problems .
So now Id like to share with you whats in my suitcase today .
Guess what ?
Books .
I have a suitcase full of books .
Heres Margaret Atwood ,  Cats Eye . 
Heres a novel by Milan Kundera .
And heres  The Guide for the Perplexed  by Maimonides .
But these are not exactly my books .
I brought these books with me because they were written by my grandfathers favorite authors .
My grandfather was a rabbi and he was a widower who lived alone in a small apartment in Brooklyn that was my favorite place in the world when I was growing up , partly because it was filled with his very gentle , very courtly presence and partly because it was filled with books .
I mean literally every table , every chair in this apartment had yielded its original function to now serve as a surface for swaying stacks of books .
Just like the rest of my family , my grandfathers favorite thing to do in the whole world was to read .
But he also loved his congregation , and you could feel this love in the sermons that he gave every week for the 62 years that he was a rabbi .
He would takes the fruits of each weeks reading and he would weave these intricate tapestries of ancient and humanist thought .
And people would come from all over to hear him speak .
But heres the thing about my grandfather .
Underneath this ceremonial role , he was really modest and really introverted  -  -  so much so that when he delivered these sermons , he had trouble making eye contact with the very same congregation that he had been speaking to for 62 years .
And even away from the podium , when you called him to say hello , he would often end the conversation prematurely for fear that he was taking up too much of your time .
But when he died at the age of 94 , the police had to close down the streets of his neighborhood to accommodate the crowd of people who came out to mourn him .
And so these days I try to learn from my grandfathers example in my own way .
So I just published a book about introversion , and it took me about seven years to write .
And for me , that seven years was like total bliss , because I was reading , I was writing , I was thinking , I was researching .
It was my version of my grandfathers hours of the day alone in his library .
But now all of a sudden my job is very different , and my job is to be out here talking about it , talking about introversion .
And thats a lot harder for me , because as honored as I am to be here with all of you right now , this is not my natural milieu .
So I prepared for moments like these as best I could .
I spent the last year practicing public speaking every chance I could get .
And I call this my  year of speaking dangerously . 
And that actually helped a lot .
But Ill tell you , what helps even more is my sense , my belief , my hope that when it comes to our attitudes to introversion and to quiet and to solitude , we truly are poised on the brink on dramatic change .
I mean , we are .
And so I am going to leave you now with three calls for action for those who share this vision .
Number one : Stop the madness for constant group work .
Just stop it .
Thank you .
And I want to be clear about what Im saying , because I deeply believe our offices should be encouraging casual , chatty cafe - style types of interactions  -  -  you know , the kind where people come together and serendipitously have an exchange of ideas .
That is great .
Its great for introverts and its great for extroverts .
But we need much more privacy and much more freedom and much more autonomy at work .
School , same thing .
We need to be teaching kids to work together , for sure , but we also need to be teaching them how to work on their own .
This is especially important for extroverted children too .
They need to work on their own because that is where deep thought comes from in part .
Okay , number two : Go to the wilderness .
Be like Buddha , have your own revelations .
Im not saying that we all have to now go off and build our own cabins in the woods and never talk to each other again , but I am saying that we could all stand to unplug and get inside our own heads a little more often .
Number three : Take a good look at whats inside your own suitcase and why you put it there .
So extroverts , maybe your suitcases are also full of books .
Or maybe theyre full of champagne glasses or skydiving equipment .
Whatever it is , I hope you take these things out every chance you get and grace us with your energy and your joy .
But introverts , you being you , you probably have the impulse to guard very carefully whats inside your own suitcase .
And thats okay .
But occasionally , just occasionally , I hope you will open up your suitcases for other people to see , because the world needs you and it needs the things you carry .
So I wish you the best of all possible journeys and the courage to speak softly .
Thank you very much .
Thank you . Thank you .
Yves Behar : Designing objects that tell stories
Designer Yves Behar digs up his creative roots to discuss some of the iconic objects hes created . Then he turns to the witty , surprising , elegant objects hes working on now  -  -  including the  $ 100 laptop . 
Being a child , and sort of crawling around the house , I remember these Turkish carpets , and there were these scenes , these battle scenes , these love scenes .
I mean , look , this animal is trying to fight back this spear from this soldier .
And my mom took these pictures actually , last week , of our carpets , and I remember this to this day .
There was another object , this sort of towering piece of furniture with creatures and gargoyles and nudity  -  -  pretty scary stuff , when youre a little kid .
What I remember today from this is that objects tell stories , so storytelling has been a really strong influence in my work .
And then there was another influence .
I was a teenager , and at 15 or 16 , I guess like all teenagers , we want to just do what we love and what we believe in .
And so , I fused together the two things I loved the most , which was skiing and windsurfing .
Those are pretty good escapes from the drab weather in Switzerland .
So , I created this compilation of the two : I took my skis and I took a board and I put a mast foot in there , and some foot straps , and some metal fins , and here I was , going really fast on frozen lakes .
It was really a death trap . I mean , it was incredible , it worked incredibly well , but it was really dangerous .
And I realized then I had to go to design school .
I mean , look at those graphics there .
So , I went to design school , and it was the early 90s when I finished .
And I saw something extraordinary happening in Silicon Valley , so I wanted to be there , and I saw that the computer was coming into our homes , that it had to change in order to be with us in our homes .
And so I got myself a job and I was working for a consultancy , and we would get in to these meetings , and these managers would come in , and they would say ,  Well , what were going to do here is really important , you know . 
And they would give the projects code names , you know , mostly from  Star Wars ,  actually : things like C3PO , Yoda , Luke .
So , in anticipation , I would be this young designer in the back of the room , and I would raise my hand , and I would ask questions .
I mean , in retrospect , probably stupid questions , but things like ,  Whats this Caps Lock key for ? 
or  Whats this Num Lock key for ?  You know , that thing ?
 You know , do people really use it ?
Do they need it ? Do they want it in their homes ? 
What I realized then is , they didnt really want to change the legacy stuff ; they didnt want to change the insides .
They were really looking for us , the designers , to create the skins , to put some pretty stuff outside of the box .
And I didnt want to be a colorist .
It wasnt what I wanted to do .
I didnt want to be a stylist in this way .
And then I saw this quote :  advertising is the price companies pay for being unoriginal . 
So , I had to start on my own . So I moved to San Francisco , and I started a little company , fuseproject .
And what I wanted to work on is important stuff .
And I wanted to really not just work on the skins , but I wanted to work on the entire human experience .
And so the first projects were sort of humble , but they took technology and maybe made it into things that people would use in a new way , and maybe finding some new functionality .
This is a watch we made for Mini Cooper , the car company , right when it launched , and its the first watch that has a display that switches from horizontal to vertical .
And that allows me to check my timer discretely , here , without bending my elbow .
And other projects , which were really about transformation , about matching the human need .
This is a little piece of furniture for an Italian manufacturer , and it ships completely flat , and then it folds into a coffee table and a stool and whatnot .
And something a little bit more experimental : this is a light fixture for Swarovski , and what it does is , it changes shape .
So , it goes from a circle , to a round , to a square , to a figure eight .
And just by drawing on a little computer tablet , the entire light fixture adjusts to what shape you want .
And then finally , the leaf lamp for Herman Miller .
This is a pretty involved process ; it took us about four and a half years .
But I really was looking for creating a unique experience of light , a new experience of light .
So , we had to design both the light and the light bulb .
And thats a unique opportunity , I would say , in design .
And the new experience I was looking for is giving the choice for the user to go from a warm , sort of glowing kind of mood light , all the way to a bright work light .
So , the light bulb actually does that .
It allows the person to switch , and to mix these two colorations .
And its done in a very simple way : one just touches the base of the light , and on one side , you can mix the brightness , and on the other , the coloration of the light .
So , all of these projects have a humanistic sense to them , and I think as designers we need to really think about how we can create a different relationship between our work and the world , whether its for business , or , as Im going to show , on some civic - type projects .
Because I think everybody agrees that as designers we bring value to business , value to the users also , but I think its the values that we put into these projects that ultimately create the greater value .
And the values we bring can be about environmental issues , about sustainability , about lower power consumption .
You know , they can be about function and beauty ; they can be about business strategy .
But designers are really the glue that brings these things together .
So Jawbone is a project that youre familiar with , and it has a humanistic technology .
It feels your skin . It rests on your skin , and it knows when it is youre talking .
And by knowing when it is youre talking , it gets rid of the other noises that it knows about , which is the environmental noises .
But the other thing that is humanistic about Jawbone is that we really decided to take out all the techie stuff , and all the nerdy stuff out of it , and try to make it as beautiful as we can .
I mean , think about it : the care we take in selecting sunglasses , or jewelry , or accessories is really important , so if it isnt beautiful , it really doesnt belong on your face .
And this is what were pursuing here .
But how we work on Jawbone is really unique .
I want to point at something here , on the left .
This is the board , this is one of the things that goes inside that makes this technology work .
But this is the design process : theres somebody changing the board , putting tracers on the board , changing the location of the ICs , as the designers on the other side are doing the work .
So , its not about slapping skins , anymore , on a technology .
Its really about designing from the inside out .
And then , on the other side of the room , the designers are making small adjustments , sketching , drawing by hand , putting it in the computer .
And its what I call being design driven .
You know , there is some push and pull , but design is really helping define the whole experience from the inside out .
And then , of course , design is never done .
And this is  -  -  the other new way that is unique in how we work is , because its never done , you have to do all this other stuff .
The packaging , and the website , and you need to continue to really touch the user , in many ways .
But how do you retain somebody , when its never done ?
And Hosain Rahman , the CEO of Aliph Jawbone , you know , really understands that you need a different structure .
So , in a way , the different structure is that were partners , its a partnership . We can continue to work and dedicate ourselves to this project , and then we also share in the rewards .
And heres another project , another partnership - type approach .
This is called Y Water , and its this guy from Los Angeles , Thomas Arndt , Austrian originally , who came to us , and all he wanted to do was to create a healthy drink , or an organic drink for his kids , to replace the high - sugar - content sodas that hes trying to get them away from .
So , we worked on this bottle , and its completely symmetrical in every dimension .
And this allows the bottle to turn into a game .
The bottles connect together , and you can create different shapes , different forms .
Thank you .
And then while we were doing this , the shape of the bottle upside down reminded us of a Y , and then we thought , well these words ,  why  and  why not ,  are probably the most important words that kids ask .
So we called it Y Water . And so this is another place where it all comes together in the same room : the three - dimensional design , the ideas , the branding , it all becomes deeply connected .
And then the other thing about this project is , we bring intellectual property , we bring a marketing approach , we bring all this stuff , but I think , at the end of the day , what we bring is these values , and these values create a soul for the companies we work with .
And its especially rewarding when your design work becomes a creative endeavor , when others can be creative and do more with it .
Heres another project , which I think really emulates that .
This is the One Laptop per Child , the $ 100 laptop .
This picture is incredible .
In Nigeria , people carry their most precious belongings on their heads .
This girl is going to school with a laptop on her head .
I mean , to me , it just means so much .
But when Nicholas Negroponte  -  -  and he has spoken about this project a lot , hes the founder of OLPC  -  -  came to us about two and a half years ago , there were some clear ideas .
He wanted to bring education and he wanted to bring technology , and those are pillars of his life , but also pillars of the mission of One Laptop per Child .
But the third pillar that he talked about was design .
And at the time , I wasnt really working on computers .
I didnt really want to , from the previous adventure .
But what he said was really significant , is that design was going to be why the kids were going to love this product , how we were going to make it low cost , robust .
And plus , he said he was going to get rid of the Caps Lock key  -  -   -  -  and the Num Lock key , too .
So , I was convinced . We designed it to be iconic , to look different . To look like its for a kid , but not like a toy .
And then the integration of all these great technologies , which youve heard about , the Wi - Fi antennas that allow the kids to connect ; the screen , which you can read in sunlight ; the keyboard , which is made out of rubber , and its protected from the environment .
You know , all these great technologies really happened because of the passion and the OLPC people and the engineers .
They fought the suppliers , they fought the manufacturers .
I mean , they fought like animals for this to remain they way it is .
And in a way , it is that will that makes projects like this one  -  -  allows the process from not destroying the original idea .
And I think this is something really important .
So , now you get these pictures  -  -  you get up in the morning , and you see the kids in Nigeria and you see them in Uruguay with their computers , and in Mongolia .
And we went away from obviously the beige .
I mean its colorful , its fun .
In fact , you can see each logo is a little bit different .
Its because we were able to run , during the manufacturing process , 20 colors for the X and the O , which is the name of the computer , and by mixing them on the manufacturing floor , you get 20 times 20 : you get 400 different options there .
So , the lessons from seeing the kids using them in the developing world are incredible .
But this is my nephew , Anthony , in Switzerland , and he had the laptop for an afternoon , and I had to take it back . It was hard .
And it was a prototype . And a month and a half later , I come back to Switzerland , and there he is playing with his own version .
Like paper , paper and cardboard .
So , Im going to finish with one last project , and this is a little bit more of adult play .
Some of you might have heard about the New York City condom .
Its actually just launched , actually launched on Valentines Day , February 14 , about 10 days ago .
So , the Department of Health in New York came to us , and they needed a way to distribute 36 million condoms for free to the citizens of New York .
So a pretty big endeavor , and we worked on the dispensers .
These are the dispensers . Theres this friendly shape .
Its a little bit like designing a fire hydrant , and it has to be easily serviceable : you have to know where it is and what it does .
And we also designed the condoms themselves .
And I was just in New York at the launch , and I went to see all these places where theyre installed : this is at a Puerto Rican little mom - and - pop store ; at a bar in Christopher Street ; at a pool hall .
I mean , theyre being installed in homeless clinics  -  -  everywhere .
Of course , clubs and discos , too .
And heres the public service announcement for this project .
Get some .
So , this is really where design is able to create a conversation .
I was in these venues , and people were , you know , really into getting them . They were excited .
It was breaking the ice , it was getting over a stigma , and I think thats also what design can do .
So , I was going to throw some condoms in the room and whatnot , but Im not sure its the etiquette here .
Yeah ? All right , all right . I have only a few .
So , I have more , you can always ask me for some more later .
And if anybody asks why youre carrying a condom , you can just say you like the design .
So , Ill finish with just one thought : if we all work together on creating value , but if we really keep in mind the values of the work that we do , I think we can change the work that we do .
We can change these values , can change the companies we work with , and eventually , together , maybe we can change the world .
So , thank you .
Paul Root Wolpe : Its time to question bio - engineering
Bioethicist Paul Root Wolpe describes an astonishing series of recent bio - engineering experiments , from glowing dogs to mice that grow human ears . He asks : Isnt it time to set some ground rules ? 
Today I want to talk about design , but not design as we usually think about it .
I want to talk about what is happening now in our scientific , biotechnological culture , where , for really the first time in history , we have the power to design bodies , to design animal bodies , to design human bodies .
In the history of our planet , there have been three great waves of evolution .
The first wave of evolution is what we think of as Darwinian evolution .
So , as you all know , species lived in particular ecological niches and particular environments , and the pressures of those environments selected which changes , through random mutation in species , were going to be preserved .
Then human beings stepped out of the Darwinian flow of evolutionary history and created the second great wave of evolution , which was we changed the environment in which we evolved .
We altered our ecological niche by creating civilization .
And that has been the second great  -  -  couple 100,000 years , 150,000 years  -  -  flow of our evolution .
By changing our environment , we put new pressures on our bodies to evolve .
Whether it was through settling down in agricultural communities , all the way through modern medicine , we have changed our own evolution .
Now were entering a third great wave of evolutionary history , which has been called many things :  intentional evolution ,   evolution by design   -  -  very different than intelligent design  -  -  whereby we are actually now intentionally designing and altering the physiological forms that inhabit our planet .
So I want to take you through a kind of whirlwind tour of that and then at the end talk a little bit about what some of the implications are for us and for our species , as well as our cultures , because of this change .
Now we actually have been doing it for a long time .
We started selectively breeding animals many , many thousands of years ago .
And if you think of dogs for example , dogs are now intentionally - designed creatures .
There isnt a dog on this earth thats a natural creature .
Dogs are the result of selectively breeding traits that we like .
But we had to do it the hard way in the old days by choosing offspring that looked a particular way and then breeding them .
We dont have to do it that way anymore .
This is a beefalo .
A beefalo is a buffalo - cattle hybrid .
And they are now making them , and someday , perhaps pretty soon , you will have beefalo patties in your local supermarket .
This is a geep , a goat - sheep hybrid .
The scientists that made this cute little creature ended up slaughtering it and eating it afterwards .
I think they said it tasted like chicken .
This is a cama .
A cama is a camel - llama hybrid , created to try to get the hardiness of a camel with some of the personality traits of a llama .
And they are now using these in certain cultures .
Then theres the liger .
This is the largest cat in the world  -  -  the lion - tiger hybrid .
Its bigger than a tiger .
And in the case of the liger , there actually have been one or two that have been seen in the wild .
But these were created by scientists using both selective breeding and genetic technology .
And then finally , everybodys favorite , the zorse .
None of this is Photoshopped . These are real creatures .
And so one of the things weve been doing is using genetic enhancement , or genetic manipulation , of normal selective breeding pushed a little bit through genetics .
And if that were all this was about , then it would be an interesting thing .
But something much , much more powerful is happening now .
These are normal mammalian cells genetically engineered with a bioluminescent gene taken out of deep - sea jellyfish .
We all know that some deep - sea creatures glow .
Well , theyve now taken that gene , that bioluminescent gene , and put it into mammal cells .
These are normal cells .
And what you see here is these cells glowing in the dark under certain wavelengths of light .
Once they could do that with cells , they could do it with organisms .
So they did it with mouse pups , kittens .
And by the way , the reason the kittens here are orange and these are green is because thats a bioluminescent gene from coral , while this is from jellyfish .
They did it with pigs .
They did it with puppies .
And , in fact , they did it with monkeys .
And if you can do it with monkeys  -  -  though the great leap in trying to genetically manipulate is actually between monkeys and apes  -  -  if they can do it in monkeys , they can probably figure out how to do it in apes , which means they can do it in human beings .
In other words , it is theoretically possible that before too long we will be biotechnologically capable of creating human beings that glow in the dark .
Be easier to find us at night .
And in fact , right now in many states , you can go out and you can buy bioluminescent pets .
These are zebra fish . Theyre normally black and silver .
These are zebra fish that have been genetically engineered to be yellow , green , red , and they are actually available now in certain states .
Other states have banned them .
Nobody knows what to do with these kinds of creatures .
There is no area of the government  -  -  not the EPA or the FDA  -  -  that controls genetically - engineered pets .
And so some states have decided to allow them , some states have decided to ban them .
Some of you may have read about the FDAs consideration right now of genetically - engineered salmon .
The salmon on top is a genetically engineered Chinook salmon , using a gene from these salmon and from one other fish that we eat , to make it grow much faster using a lot less feed .
And right now the FDA is trying to make a final decision on whether , pretty soon , you could be eating this fish  -  -  itll be sold in the stores .
And before you get too worried about it , here in the United States , the majority of food you buy in the supermarket already has genetically - modified components to it .
So even as we worry about it , we have allowed it to go on in this country  -  -  much different in Europe  -  -  without any regulation , and even without any identification on the package .
These are all the first cloned animals of their type .
So in the lower right here , you have Dolly , the first cloned sheep  -  -  now happily stuffed in a museum in Edinburgh ; Ralph the rat , the first cloned rat ; CC the cat , for cloned cat ; Snuppy , the first cloned dog  -  -  Snuppy for Seoul National University puppy  -  -  created in South Korea by the very same man that some of you may remember had to end up resigning in disgrace because he claimed he had cloned a human embryo , which he had not .
He actually was the first person to clone a dog , which is a very difficult thing to do , because dog genomes are very plastic .
This is Prometea , the first cloned horse .
Its a Haflinger horse cloned in Italy , a real  gold ring  of cloning , because there are many horses that win important races who are geldings .
In other words , the equipment to put them out to stud has been removed .
But if you can clone that horse , you can have both the advantage of having a gelding run in the race and his identical genetic duplicate can then be put out to stud .
These were the first cloned calves , the first cloned grey wolves , and then , finally , the first cloned piglets : Alexis , Chista , Carrel , Janie and Dotcom .
In addition , weve started to use cloning technology to try to save endangered species .
This is the use of animals now to create drugs and other things in their bodies that we want to create .
So with antithrombin in that goat  -  -  that goat has been genetically modified so that the molecules of its milk actually include the molecule of antithrombin that GTC Genetics wants to create .
And then in addition , transgenic pigs , knockout pigs , from the National Institute of Animal Science in South Korea , to try to create all kinds of drugs and other industrial types of chemicals that they want the blood and the milk of these animals to produce for them , instead of producing them in an industrial way .
These are two creatures that were created in order to save endangered species .
The guar is an endangered Southeast Asian ungulate .
A somatic cell , a body cell , was taken from its body , gestated in the ovum of a cow , and then that cow gave birth to a guar .
Same thing happened with the mouflon , where its an endangered species of sheep .
It was gestated in a regular sheep body , which actually raises an interesting biological problem .
We have two kinds of DNA in our bodies .
We have our nucleic DNA that everybody thinks of as our DNA , but we also have DNA in our mitochondria , which are the energy packets of the cell .
That DNA is passed down through our mothers .
So really , what you end up having here is not a guar and not a mouflon , but a guar with cow mitochondria , and therefore cow mitochondrial DNA , and a mouflon with another species of sheeps mitochondrial DNA .
These are really hybrids , not pure animals .
And it raises the question of how were going to define animal species in the age of biotechnology  -  -  a question that were not really sure yet how to solve .
This lovely creature is an Asian cockroach .
And what theyve done here is theyve put electrodes in its ganglia and its brain and then a transmitter on top , and its on a big computer tracking ball .
And now , using a joystick , they can send this creature around the lab and control whether it goes left or right , forwards or backwards .
Theyve created a kind of insect bot , or bugbot .
It gets worse than that  -  -  or perhaps better than that .
This actually is one of DARPAs very important  -  -  DARPA is the Defense Research Agency  -  -  one of their projects .
These goliath beetles are wired in their wings .
They have a computer chip strapped to their backs , and they can fly these creatures around the lab .
They can make them go left , right . They can make them take off .
They cant actually make them land .
They put them about one inch above the ground , and then they shut everything off and they go pfft .
But its the closest they can get to a landing .
And in fact , this technology has gotten so developed that this creature  -  -  this is a moth  -  -  this is the moth in its pupa stage , and thats when they put the wires in and they put in the computer technology , so that when the moth actually emerges as a moth , it is already prewired .
The wires are already in its body , and they can just hook it up to their technology , and now theyve got these bugbots that they can send out for surveillance .
They can put little cameras on them and perhaps someday deliver other kinds of ordinance to warzones .
Its not just insects .
This is the ratbot , or the robo - rat by Sanjiv Talwar at SUNY Downstate .
Again , its got technology  -  -  its got electrodes going into its left and right hemispheres ; its got a camera on top of its head .
The scientists can make this creature go left , right .
They have it running through mazes , controlling where its going .
Theyve now created an organic robot .
The graduate students in Sanjiv Talwars lab said ,  Is this ethical ?
Weve taken away the autonomy of this animal . 
Ill get back to that in a minute .
Theres also been work done with monkeys .
This is Miguel Nicolelis of Duke .
He took owl monkeys , wired them up so that a computer watched their brains while they moved , especially looking at the movement of their right arm .
The computer learned what the monkey brain did to move its arm in various ways .
They then hooked it up to a prosthetic arm , which you see here in the picture , put the arm in another room .
Pretty soon , the computer learned , by reading the monkeys brainwaves , to make that arm in the other room do whatever the monkeys arm did .
Then he put a video monitor in the monkeys cage that showed the monkey this prosthetic arm , and the monkey got fascinated .
The monkey recognized that whatever she did with her arm , this prosthetic arm would do .
And eventually she was moving it and moving it , and eventually stopped moving her right arm and , staring at the screen , could move the prosthetic arm in the other room only with her brainwaves  -  -  which means that monkey became the first primate in the history of the world to have three independent functional arms .
And its not just technology that were putting into animals .
This is Thomas DeMarse at the University of Florida .
He took 20,000 and then 60,000 disaggregated rat neurons  -  -  so these are just individual neurons from rats  -  -  put them on a chip .
They self - aggregated into a network , became an integrated chip .
And he used that as the IT piece of a mechanism which ran a flight simulator .
So now we have organic computer chips made out of living , self - aggregating neurons .
Finally , Mussa - Ivaldi of Northwestern took a completely intact , independent lamprey eel brain .
This is a brain from a lamprey eel .
It is living  -  -  fully - intact brain in a nutrient medium with these electrodes going off to the sides , attached photosensitive sensors to the brain , put it into a cart  -  -  heres the cart , the brain is sitting there in the middle  -  -  and using this brain as the sole processor for this cart , when you turn on a light and shine it at the cart , the cart moves toward the light ; when you turn it off , it moves away .
Its photophilic .
So now we have a complete living lamprey eel brain .
Is it thinking lamprey eel thoughts , sitting there in its nutrient medium ?
I dont know , but in fact it is a fully living brain that we have managed to keep alive to do our bidding .
So , we are now at the stage where we are creating creatures for our own purposes .
This is a mouse created by Charles Vacanti of the University of Massachusetts .
He altered this mouse so that it was genetically engineered to have skin that was less immunoreactive to human skin , put a polymer scaffolding of an ear under it and created an ear that could then be taken off the mouse and transplanted onto a human being .
Genetic engineering coupled with polymer physiotechnology coupled with xenotransplantation .
This is where we are in this process .
Finally , not that long ago , Craig Venter created the first artificial cell , where he took a cell , took a DNA synthesizer , which is a machine , created an artificial genome , put it in a different cell  -  -  the genome was not of the cell he put it in  -  -  and that cell then reproduced as the other cell .
In other words , that was the first creature in the history of the world that had a computer as its parent  -  -  it did not have an organic parent .
And so , asks The Economist :  The first artificial organism and its consequences . 
So you may have thought that the creation of life was going to happen in something that looked like that .
But in fact , thats not what Frankensteins lab looks like .
This is what Frankensteins lab looks like .
This is a DNA synthesizer , and here at the bottom are just bottles of A , T , C and G  -  -  the four chemicals that make up our DNA chain .
And so , we need to ask ourselves some questions .
For the first time in the history of this planet , we are able to directly design organisms .
We can manipulate the plasmas of life with unprecedented power , and it confers on us a responsibility .
Is everything okay ?
Is it okay to manipulate and create whatever creatures we want ?
Do we have free reign to design animals ?
Do we get to go someday to Pets R Us and say ,  Look , I want a dog .
Id like it to have the head of a Dachshund , the body of a retriever , maybe some pink fur , and lets make it glow in the dark  ?
Does industry get to create creatures who , in their milk , in their blood , and in their saliva and other bodily fluids , create the drugs and industrial molecules we want and then warehouse them as organic manufacturing machines ?
Do we get to create organic robots , where we remove the autonomy from these animals and turn them just into our playthings ?
And then the final step of this , once we perfect these technologies in animals and we start using them in human beings , what are the ethical guidelines that we will use then ?
Its already happening . Its not science fiction .
We are not only already using these things in animals , some of them were already beginning to use on our own bodies .
We are now taking control of our own evolution .
We are directly designing the future of the species of this planet .
It confers upon us an enormous responsibility that is not just the responsibility of the scientists and the ethicists who are thinking about it and writing about it now .
It is the responsibility of everybody because it will determine what kind of planet and what kind of bodies we will have in the future .
Thanks .
Péter Fankhauser : Meet Rezero , the dancing ballbot
Engineering student Péter Fankhauser demonstrates Rezero , a robot that balances on a ball . Designed and built by students , Rezero is the first ballbot made to move quickly and gracefully  -  -  and even dance .
Let me introduce to you Rezero .
This little fellow was developed by a group of 10 undergraduate students at the Autonomous Systems Laboratory at ETH - Zurich .
Our robot belongs to a family of robots called Ballbots .
Instead of wheels , a Ballbot is balancing and moving on one single ball .
The main characteristics of such a system is that theres one sole contact point to the ground .
This means that the robot is inherently unstable .
Its like when I am trying to stand on one foot .
You might ask yourself , whats the usefulness of a robot thats unstable ?
Now well explain that in a second .
Let me first explain how Rezero actually keeps his balance .
Rezero keeps his balance by constantly measuring his pitch angle with a sensor .
He then counteracts and avoids toppling over by turning the motors appropriately .
This happens 160 times per second , and if anything fails in this process , Rezero would immediately fall to the ground .
Now to move and to balance , Rezero needs to turn the ball .
The ball is driven by three special wheels that allow Rezero to move into any direction and also move around his own axis at the same time .
Due to his instability , Rezero is always in motion . Now heres the trick .
Its indeed exactly this instability that allows a robot to move very  dynamically  .
Lets play a little .
You may have wondered what happens if I give the robot a little push .
In this mode , hes trying to maintain his position .
For the next demo , Id like you to introduce to my colleagues Michael , on the computer , and Thomas whos helping me onstage .
In the next mode , Rezero is passive , and we can move him around .
With almost no force I can control his position and his velocity .
I can also make him spin .
In the next mode , we can get Rezero to follow a person .
Hes now keeping a constant distance to Thomas .
This works with a laser sensor thats mounted on top of Rezero .
With the same method , we can also get him to circle a person .
We call this the orbiting mode .
All right , thank you , Thomas .
Now , whats the use of this technology ?
For now , its an experiment , but let me show you some possible future applications .
Rezero could be used in exhibitions or parks .
With a screen it could inform people or show them around in a fun and entertaining way .
In a hospital , this device could be used to carry around medical equipment .
Due to the Ballbot system , it has a very small footprint and its also easy to move around .
And of course , who wouldnt like to take a ride on one of these .
And these are more practical applications .
But theres also a certain beauty within this technology .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Deborah Rhodes : A test that finds 3 x more breast tumors , and why its not available to you
Working with a team of physicists , Dr . Deborah Rhodes developed a new tool for tumor detection thats 3 times as effective as traditional mammograms for women with dense breast tissue . The life - saving implications are stunning . So why havent we heard of it ? Rhodes shares the story behind the tools creation , and the web of politics and economics that keep it from mainstream use .
There are two groups of women when it comes to screening mammography  -  -  women in whom mammography works very well and has saved thousands of lives and women in whom it doesnt work well at all .
Do you know which group youre in ?
If you dont , youre not alone .
Because the breast has become are very political organ .
The truth has become lost in all the rhetoric coming from the press , politicians , radiologists and medical imaging companies .
I will do my best this morning to tell you what I think is the truth .
But first , my disclosures .
I am not a breast cancer survivor .
Im not a radiologist .
I dont have any patents , and Ive never received any money from a medical imaging company , and I am not seeking your vote .
What I am is a doctor of internal medicine who became passionately interested in this topic about 10 years ago when a patient asked me a question .
She came to see me after discovering a breast lump .
Her sister had been diagnosed with breast cancer in her 40s .
She and I were both very pregnant at that time , and my heart just ached for her , imagining how afraid she must be .
Fortunately , her lump proved to be benign .
But she asked me a question : how confident was I that I would find a tumor early on her mammogram if she developed one ?
So I studied her mammogram , and I reviewed the radiology literature , and I was shocked to discover that , in her case , our chances of finding a tumor early on the mammogram were less than the toss of a coin .
You may recall a year ago when a firestorm erupted after the United States Preventive Services Task Force reviewed the worlds mammography screening literature and issued a guideline recommending against screening mammograms in women in their 40s .
Now everybody rushed to criticize the Task Force , even though most of them werent in anyway familiar with the mammography studies .
It took the Senate just 17 days to ban the use of the guidelines in determining insurance coverage .
Radiologists were outraged by the guidelines .
The pre - eminent mammographer in the United States issued the following quote to the Washington Post .
The radiologists were , in turn , criticized for protecting their own financial self - interest .
But in my view , the radiologists are heroes .
Theres a shortage of radiologists qualified to read mammograms , and thats because mammograms are one of the most complex of all radiology studies to interpret , and because radiologists are sued more often over missed breast cancer than any other cause .
But that very fact is telling .
Where there is this much legal smoke , there is likely to be some fire .
The factor most responsible for that fire is breast density .
Breast density refers to the relative amount of fat  -  -  pictured here in yellow  -  -  versus connective and epithelial tissues  -  -  pictured in pink .
And that proportion is primarily genetically determined .
Two - thirds of women in their 40s have dense breast tissue , which is why mammography doesnt work as well in them .
And although breast density generally declines with age , up to a third of women retain dense breast tissue for years after menopause .
So how do you know if your breasts are dense ?
Well , you need to read the details of your mammography report .
Radiologists classify breast density into four categories based on the appearance of the tissue on a mammogram .
If the breast is less than 25 percent dense , thats called fatty - replaced .
The next category is scattered fibroglandular densities , followed by heterogeneously dense and extremely dense .
And breasts that fall into these two categories are considered dense .
The problem with breast density is that its truly the wolf in sheeps clothing .
Both tumors and dense breast tissue appear white on a mammogram , and the X - ray often cant distinguish between the two .
So its easy to see this tumor in the upper part of this fatty breast .
But imagine how difficult it would be to find that tumor in this dense breast .
Thats why mammograms find over 80 percent of tumors in fatty breasts , but as few as 40 percent in extremely dense breasts .
Now its bad enough that breast density makes it hard to find a cancer , but it turns out that its also a powerful predictor of your risk for breast cancer .
Its a stronger risk factor than having a mother or a sister with breast cancer .
At the time my patient posed this question to me , breast density was an obscure topic in the radiology literature , and very few women having mammograms , or the physicians ordering them , knew about this .
But what else could I offer her ?
Mammograms have been around since the 1960s , and its changed very little .
There have been surprisingly few innovations , until digital mammography was approved in 2000 .
Digital mammography is still an X - ray of the breast , but the images can be stored and manipulated digitally , just like we can with a digital camera .
The U.S . has invested four billion dollars converting to digital mammography equipment , and what have we gained from that investment ?
In a study funded by over 25 million taxpayer dollars , digital mammography was found to be no better over all than traditional mammography , and in fact , it was worse in older women .
But it was better in one group , and that was women under 50 who were pre - menopausal and had dense breasts , and in those women , digital mammography found twice as many cancers , but it still only found 60 percent .
So digital mammography has been a giant leap forward for manufacturers of digital mammography equipment , but its been a very small step forward for womankind .
What about ultrasound ?
Ultrasound generates more biopsies that are unnecessary relative to other technologies , so its not widely used .
And MRI is exquisitely sensitive for finding tumors , but its also very expensive .
If we think about disruptive technology , we see an almost ubiquitous pattern of the technology getting smaller and less expensive .
Think about iPods compared to stereos .
But its the exact opposite in health care .
The machines get ever bigger and ever more expensive .
Screening the average young woman with an MRI is kind of like driving to the grocery store in a Hummer .
Its just way too much equipment .
One MRI scan costs 10 times what a digital mammogram costs .
And sooner or later , were going to have to accept the fact that health care innovation cant always come at a much higher price .
Malcolm Gladwell wrote an article in the New Yorker on innovation , and he made the case that scientific discoveries are rarely the product of one individuals genius .
Rather , big ideas can be orchestrated , if you can simply gather people with different perspectives in a room and get them to talk about things that they dont ordinarily talk about .
Its like the essence of TED .
He quotes one innovator who says ,  The only time a physician and a physicist get together is when the physicist gets sick . 
This makes no sense , because physicians have all kinds of problems that they dont realize have solutions .
And physicists have all kinds of solutions for things that they dont realize are problems .
Now , take a look at this cartoon that accompanied Gladwells article , and tell me if you see something disturbing about this depiction of innovative thinkers .
So if you will allow me a little creative license , I will tell you the story of the serendipitous collision of my patients problem with a physicists solution .
Shortly after her visit , I was introduced to a nuclear physicist at Mayo named Michael OConner , who was a specialist in cardiac imaging , something I had nothing to do with .
And he happened to tell me about a conference hed just returned from in Israel , where they were talking about a new type of gamma detector .
Now gamma imaging has been around for a long time to image the heart , and it had even been tried to image the breast .
But the problem was that the gamma detectors were these huge , bulky tubes , and they were filled with these scintillating crystals , and you just couldnt get them close enough around the breast to find small tumors .
But the potential advantage was that gamma rays , unlike X - rays , are not influenced by breast density .
But this technology could not find tumors when theyre small , and finding a small tumor is critical for survival .
If you can find a tumor when its less than a centimeter , survival exceeds 90 percent , but drops off rapidly as tumor size increases .
But Michael told me about a new type of gamma detector that hed seen , and this is it .
Its made not of a bulky tube , but of a thin layer of a semiconductor material that serves as the gamma detector .
And I started talking to him about this problem with breast density , and we realized that we might be able to get this detector close enough around the breast to actually find small tumors .
So after putting together a grid of these cubes with tape  -  -   -  -  Michael hacked off the X - ray plate of a mammography machine that was about to be thrown out , and we attached the new detector , and we decided to call this machine Molecular Breast Imaging , or MBI .
This is an image from our first patient .
And you can see , using the old gamma technology , that it just looked like noise .
But using our new detector , we could begin to see the outline of a tumor .
So here we were , a nuclear physicist , an internist , soon joined by Carrie Hruska , a biomedical engineer , and two radiologists , and we were trying to take on the entrenched world of mammography with a machine that was held together by duct tape .
To say that we faced high doses of skepticism in those early years is just a huge understatement , but we were so convinced that we might be able to make this work that we chipped away with incremental modifications to this system .
This is our current detector .
And you can see that it looks a lot different .
The duct tape is gone , and we added a second detector on top of the breast , which has further improved our tumor detection .
So how does this work ?
The patient receives an injection of a radio tracer thats taken up by rapidly proliferating tumor cells , but not by normal cells , and this is the key difference from mammography .
Mammography relies on differences in the appearance of the tumor from the background tissue , and weve seen that those differences can be obscured in a dense breast .
But MBI exploits the different molecular behavior of tumors , and therefore , its impervious to breast density .
After the injection , the patients breast is placed between the detectors .
And if youve ever had a mammogram  -  -  if youre old enough to have had a mammogram  -  -  you know what comes next : pain .
You may be surprised to know that mammography is the only radiologic study thats regulated by federal law , and the law requires that the equivalent of a 40 - pound car battery come down on your breast during this study .
But with MBI , we use just light , pain - free compression .
And the detector then transmits the image to the computer .
So heres an example .
You can see , on the right , a mammogram showing a faint tumor , the edges of which are blurred by the dense tissue .
But the MBI image shows that tumor much more clearly , as well as a second tumor , which profoundly influence that patients surgical options .
In this example , although the mammogram found one tumor , we were able to demonstrate three discrete tumors  -  -  one is small as three millimeters .
Our big break came in 2004 .
After we had demonstrated that we could find small tumors , we used these images to submit a grant to the Susan G . Komen Foundation .
And we were elated when they took a chance on a team of completely unknown investigators and funded us to study 1,000 women with dense breasts , comparing a screening mammogram to an MBI .
Of the tumors that we found , mammography found only 25 percent of those tumors .
MBI found 83 percent .
Heres an example from that screening study .
The digital mammogram was read as normal and shows lots of dense tissue , but the MBI shows an area of intense uptake , which correlated with a two - centimeter tumor .
In this case , a one - centimeter tumor .
And in this case , a 45 - year - old medical secretary at Mayo , who had lost her mother to breast cancer when she was very young , wanted to enroll in our study .
And her mammogram showed an area of very dense tissue , but her MBI showed an area of worrisome uptake , which we can also see on a color image .
And this corresponded to a tumor the size of a golf ball .
But fortunately it was removed before it had spread to her lymph nodes .
So now that we knew that this technology could find three times more tumors in a dense breast , we had to solve one very important problem .
We had to figure out how to lower the radiation dose , and we have spent the last three years making modifications to every aspect of the imaging system to allow this .
And Im very happy to report that were now using a dose of radiation that is equivalent to the effective dose from one digital mammogram .
And at this low dose , were continuing this screening study , and this image from three weeks ago in a 67 - year - old woman shows a normal digital mammogram , but an MBI image showing an uptake that proved to be a large cancer .
So this is not just young women that its benefiting .
Its also older women with dense tissue .
And were now routinely using one - fifth the radiation dose thats used in any other type of gamma technology .
MBI generates four images per breast .
MRI generates over a thousand .
It takes a radiologist years of specialty training to become expert in differentiating the normal anatomic detail from the worrisome finding .
But I suspect even the non - radiologists in the room can find the tumor on the MBI image .
But this is why MBI is so potentially disruptive  -  -  its as accurate as MRI , and its a fraction of the cost .
But you can understand why there may be forces in the breast - imaging world who prefer the status quo .
After achieving what we felt were remarkable results , our manuscript was rejected by four journals .
After the fourth rejection , we requested reconsideration of the manuscript , because we strongly suspected that one of the reviewers who had rejected it had a financial conflict of interest in a competing technology .
Our manuscript was then accepted and will be published later this month in the journal Radiology .
We still need to complete the screening study using the low dose , and then our findings will need to be replicated at other institutions , and this could take five or more years .
If this technology is widely adopted , I will not benefit financially in any way , and that is very important to me , because it allows me to continue to tell you the truth .
But I recognize  -  -  I recognize that the adoption of this technology will depend as much on economic and political forces as it will on the soundness of the science .
The MBI unit has now been FDA approved , but its not yet widely available .
So until something is available for women with dense breasts , there are things that you should know to protect yourself .
First , know your density .
Ninety percent of women dont , and 95 percent of women dont know that it increases your breast cancer risk .
The State of Connecticut became the first and only state to mandate that women receive notification of their breast density after a mammogram .
I was at a conference of 60,000 people in breast - imaging last week in Chicago , and I was stunned that there was a heated debate as to whether we should be telling women what their breast density is .
Of course we should .
And if you dont know , please ask your doctor or read the details of your mammography report .
Second , if youre pre - menopausal , try to schedule your mammogram in the first two weeks of your menstrual cycle , when breast density is relatively lower .
Third , if you notice a persistent change in your breast , insist on additional imaging .
And fourth and most important , the mammography debate will rage on , but I do believe that all women 40 and older should have an annual mammogram .
Mammography isnt perfect , but its the only test thats been proven to reduce mortality from breast cancer .
But this mortality banner is the very sword which mammographys most ardent advocates use to deter innovation .
Some women who develop breast cancer die from it many years later , and most women , thankfully , survive .
So it takes 10 or more years for any screening method to demonstrate a reduction in mortality from breast cancer .
Mammographys the only one thats been around long enough to have a chance of making that claim .
It is time for us to accept both the extraordinary successes of mammography and the limitations .
We need to individualize screening based on density .
For women without dense breasts , mammography is the best choice .
But for women with dense breasts ; we shouldnt abandon screening altogether , we need to offer them something better .
The babies that we were carrying when my patient first asked me this question are now both in middle school , and the answer has been so slow to come .
Shes given me her blessing to share this story with you .
After undergoing biopsies that further increased her risk for cancer and losing her sister to cancer , she made the difficult decision to have a prophylactic mastectomy .
We can and must do better , not just in time for her granddaughters and my daughters , but in time for you .
Thank you .
Pranav Mistry : The thrilling potential of SixthSense technology
At TEDIndia , Pranav Mistry demos several tools that help the physical world interact with the world of data  -  -  including a deep look at his SixthSense device and a new , paradigm - shifting paper  laptop .  In an onstage Q and A , Mistry says hell open - source the software behind SixthSense , to open its possibilities to all .
We grew up interacting with the physical objects around us .
There are an enormous number of them that we use every day .
Unlike most of our computing devices , these objects are much more fun to use .
When you talk about objects , one other thing automatically comes attached to that thing , and that is gestures : how we manipulate these objects , how we use these objects in everyday life .
We use gestures not only to interact with these objects , but we also use them to interact with each other .
A gesture of  Namaste !  , maybe , to respect someone , or maybe  -  -  in India I dont need to teach a kid that this means  four runs  in cricket .
It comes as a part of our everyday learning .
So , I am very interested , from the beginning , that how  -  -  how our knowledge about everyday objects and gestures , and how we use these objects , can be leveraged to our interactions with the digital world .
Rather than using a keyboard and mouse , why can I not use my computer in the same way that I interact in the physical world ?
So , I started this exploration around eight years back , and it literally started with a mouse on my desk .
Rather than using it for my computer , I actually opened it .
Most of you might be aware that , in those days , the mouse used to come with a ball inside , and there were two rollers that actually guide the computer where the ball is moving , and , accordingly , where the mouse is moving .
So , I was interested in these two rollers , and I actually wanted more , so I borrowed another mouse from a friend  -  -  never returned to him  -  -  and I now had four rollers .
Interestingly , what I did with these rollers is , basically , I took them off of these mouses and then put them in one line .
It had some strings and pulleys and some springs .
What I got is basically a gesture interface device that actually acts as a motion - sensing device made for two dollars .
So , here , whatever movement I do in my physical world is actually replicated inside the digital world just using this small device that I made , around eight years back , in 2000 .
Because I was interested in integrating these two worlds , I thought of sticky notes .
I thought ,  Why can I not connect the normal interface of a physical sticky note to the digital world ? 
A message written on a sticky note to my mom on paper can come to an SMS , or maybe a meeting reminder automatically syncs with my digital calendar  -  -  a to - do list that automatically syncs with you .
But you can also search in the digital world , or maybe you can write a query , saying ,  What is Dr . Smiths address ? 
and this small system actually prints it out  -  -  so it actually acts like a paper input - output system , just made out of paper .
In another exploration , I thought of making a pen that can draw in three dimensions .
So , I implemented this pen that can help designers and architects not only think in three dimensions , but they can actually draw so that its more intuitive to use that way .
Then I thought ,  Why not make a Google Map , but in the physical world ? 
Rather than typing a keyword to find something , I put my objects on top of it .
If I put a boarding pass , it will show me where the flight gate is .
A coffee cup will show where you can find more coffee , or where you can trash the cup .
So , these were some of the earlier explorations I did because the goal was to connect these two worlds seamlessly .
Among all these experiments , there was one thing in common : I was trying to bring a part of the physical world to the digital world .
I was taking some part of the objects , or any of the intuitiveness of real life , and bringing them to the digital world , because the goal was to make our computing interfaces more intuitive .
But then I realized that we humans are not actually interested in computing .
What we are interested in is information .
We want to know about things .
We want to know about dynamic things going around .
So I thought , around last year  -  -  in the beginning of the last year  -  -  I started thinking ,  Why can I not take this approach in the reverse way ? 
Maybe ,  How about I take my digital world and paint the physical world with that digital information ? 
Because pixels are actually , right now , confined in these rectangular devices that fit in our pockets .
Why can I not remove this confine and take that to my everyday objects , everyday life so that I dont need to learn the new language for interacting with those pixels ?
So , in order to realize this dream , I actually thought of putting a big - size projector on my head .
I think thats why this is called a head - mounted projector , isnt it ?
I took it very literally , and took my bike helmet , put a little cut over there so that the projector actually fits nicely .
So now , what I can do  -  -  I can augment the world around me with this digital information .
But later , I realized that I actually wanted to interact with those digital pixels , also .
So I put a small camera over there , that acts as a digital eye .
Later , we moved to a much better , consumer - oriented pendant version of that , that many of you now know as the SixthSense device .
But the most interesting thing about this particular technology is that you can carry your digital world with you wherever you go .
You can start using any surface , any wall around you , as an interface .
The camera is actually tracking all your gestures .
Whatever youre doing with your hands , its understanding that gesture .
And , actually , if you see , there are some color markers that in the beginning version we are using with it .
You can start painting on any wall .
You stop by a wall , and start painting on that wall .
But we are not only tracking one finger , here .
We are giving you the freedom of using all of both of your hands , of a map just by pinching all present .
The camera is actually doing  -  -  just , getting all the images  -  -  is doing the edge recognition and also the color recognition and so many other small algorithms are going on inside .
So , technically , its a little bit complex , but it gives you an output which is more intuitive to use , in some sense .
But Im more excited that you can actually take it outside .
Rather than getting your camera out of your pocket , you can just do the gesture of taking a photo and it takes a photo for you .
Thank you .
And later I can find a wall , anywhere , and start browsing those photos or maybe ,  OK , I want to modify this photo a little bit and send it as an email to a friend . 
So , we are looking for an era where computing will actually merge with the physical world .
And , of course , if you dont have any surface , you can start using your palm for simple operations .
Here , Im dialing a phone number just using my hand .
The camera is actually not only understanding your hand movements , but , interestingly , is also able to understand what objects you are holding in your hand .
What were doing here is actually  -  -  for example , in this case , the book cover is matched with so many thousands , or maybe millions of books online , and checking out which book it is .
Once it has that information , it finds out more reviews about that , or maybe New York Times has a sound overview on that , so you can actually hear , on a physical book , a review as sound .
This was Obamas visit last week to MIT .
So , I was seeing the live  video  of his talk , outside , on just a newspaper .
Your newspaper will show you live weather information rather than having it updated  -  -  like , you have to check your computer in order to do that , right ?
When Im going back , I can just use my boarding pass to check how much my flight has been delayed , because at that particular time , Im not feeling like opening my IPhone , and checking out a particular icon .
And I think this technology will not only change the way  -  -  yes .
It will change the way we interact with people , also , not only the physical world .
The fun part is , Im going to the Boston metro , and playing a pong game inside the train on the ground , right ?
And I think the imagination is the only limit of what you can think of when this kind of technology merges with real life .
But many of you argue , actually , that all of our work is not only about physical objects .
We actually do lots of accounting and paper editing and all those kinds of things ; what about that ?
And many of you are excited about the next generation tablet computers to come out in the market .
So , rather than waiting for that , I actually made my own , just using a piece of paper .
So , what I did here is remove the camera  -  -  All the webcam cameras have a microphone inside the camera .
I removed the microphone from that , and then just pinched that  -  -  like I just made a clip out of the microphone  -  -  and clipped that to a piece of paper , any paper that you found around .
So now the sound of the touch is getting me when exactly Im touching the paper .
But the camera is actually tracking where my fingers are moving .
You can of course watch movies .
and I am a Wilderness Explorer in Tribe 54 .  ) And you can of course play games .
Here , the camera is actually understanding how youre holding the paper and playing a car - racing game .
Many of you already must have thought , OK , you can browse .
Yeah . Of course you can browse to any websites or you can do all sorts of computing on a piece of paper wherever you need it .
So , more interestingly , Im interested in how we can take that in a more dynamic way .
When I come back to my desk I can just pinch that information back to my desktop so I can use my full - size computer .
And why only computers ? We can just play with papers .
Paper world is interesting to play with .
Here , Im taking a part of a document and putting over here a second part from a second place  -  -  and Im actually modifying the information that I have over there .
Yeah . And I say ,  OK , this looks nice , let me print it out , that thing . 
So I now have a print - out of that thing , and now  -  -  the workflow is more intuitive the way we used to do it maybe 20 years back , rather than now switching between these two worlds .
So , as a last thought , I think that integrating information to everyday objects will not only help us to get rid of the digital divide , the gap between these two worlds , but will also help us , in some way , to stay human , to be more connected to our physical world .
And it will actually help us not end up being machines sitting in front of other machines .
Thats all . Thank you .
Thank you .
So , Pranav , first of all , youre a genius .
This is incredible , really .
What are you doing with this ? Is there a company being planned ?
Or is this research forever , or what ?
Pranav Mistry : So , there are lots of companies  -  -  actually sponsor companies of Media Lab  -  -  interested in taking this ahead in one or another way .
Companies like mobile phone operators want to take this in a different way than the NGOs in India ,  who  are thinking ,  Why can we only have Sixth Sense ?
We should have a Fifth Sense for missing - sense people who can not speak .
This technology can be used for them to speak out in a different way with maybe a speaker system . 
What are your own plans ? Are you staying at MIT , or are you going to do something with this ?
PM : Im trying to make this more available to people so that anyone can develop their own SixthSense device , because the hardware is actually not that hard to manufacture or hard to make your own .
We will provide all the open source software for them , maybe starting next month .
Open source ? Wow .
Are you going to come back to India with some of this , at some point ?
PM : Yeah . Yes , yes , of course .
What are your plans ? MIT ?
India ? How are you going to split your time going forward ?
PM : There is a lot of energy here . Lots of learning .
All of this work that you have seen is all about my learning in India .
And now , if you see , its more about the cost - effectiveness : this system costs you $ 300 compared to the $ 20,000 surface tables , or anything like that .
Or maybe even the $ 2 mouse gesture system at that time was costing around $ 5,000 ?
So , we actually  -  -  I showed that , at a conference , to President Abdul Kalam , at that time , and then he said ,  OK , we should use this in Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for some use of that . 
So Im excited about how I can bring the technology to the masses rather than just keeping that technology in the lab environment .
Based on the people weve seen at TED , I would say youre truly one of the two or three best inventors in the world right now .
Its an honor to have you at TED .
Thank you so much .
Thats fantastic .
Kevin Stone : The bio - future of joint replacement
Arthritis and injury grind down millions of joints , but few get the best remedy  -  -  real biological tissue . Kevin Stone shows a treatment that could sidestep the high costs and donor shortfall of human - to - human transplants with a novel use of animal tissue .
So let me just start with my story .
So I tore my knee joint meniscus cartilage playing soccer in college .
Then I went on to tear my ACL , the ligament in my knee , and then developed an arthritic knee .
And Im sure that many of you in this audience have that same story , and , by the way , I married a woman who has exactly the same story .
So this motivated me to become an orthopedic surgeon and to see if I couldnt focus on solutions for those problems that would keep me playing sports and not limit me .
So with that , let me just show you a quick video to get you in the mood of what were trying to explain .
We are all aware of the risk of cancer , but theres another disease thats destined to affect even more of us : arthritis .
Cancer may kill you , but when you look at the numbers , arthritis ruins more lives .
Assuming you live a long life , theres a 50 percent chance youll develop arthritis .
And its not just aging that causes arthritis .
Common injuries can lead to decades of pain , until our joints quite literally grind to a halt .
Desperate for a solution , weve turned to engineering to design artificial components to replace our worn - out body parts , but in the midst of the modern buzz around the promises of a bionic body , shouldnt we stop and ask if theres a better , more natural way ?
Lets consider an alternative path .
What if all the replacements our bodies need already exist in nature , or within our own stem cells ?
This is the field of biologic replacements , where we replace worn - out parts with new , natural ones .
Kevin Stone : And so , the mission is : how do I treat these things biologically ?
And lets talk about both what I did for my wife , and what Ive done for hundreds of other patients .
First thing for my wife , and the most common thing I hear from my patients , particularly in the 40 -  to 80 - year - old age group , 70 - year - old age group , is they come in and say ,  Hey , Doc , isnt there just a shock absorber you can put in my knee ?
Im not ready for joint replacement . 
And so for her , I put in a human meniscus allograft donor right into that  knee  joint space .
And  the allograft  replaces  the missing meniscus  .
And then for that unstable ligament , we put in a human donor ligament to stabilize the knee .
And then for the damaged arthritis on the surface , we did a stem cell paste graft , which we designed in 1991 , to regrow that articular cartilage surface and give it back a smooth surface there .
So heres my wifes bad knee on the left , and her just hiking now four months later in Aspen , and doing well .
And it works , not just for my wife , but certainly for other patients .
The girl on the video , Jen Hudak , just won the Superpipe in Aspen just nine months after having destroyed her knee , as you see in the other image  -  -  and having a paste graft to that knee .
And so we can regrow these surfaces biologically .
So with all this success , why isnt that good enough , you might ask .
Well the reason is because theres not enough donor cycles .
Theres not enough young , healthy people falling off their motorcycle and donating that tissue to us .
And the tissues very expensive .
And so thats not going to be a solution thats going to get us global with biologic tissue .
But the solution is animal tissue because its plentiful , its cheap , you can get it from young , healthy tissues , but the barrier is immunology .
And the specific barrier is a specific epitope called the galactosyl , or gal epitope .
So if were going to transplant animal tissues to people , we have to figure out a way to get rid of that epitope .
So my story in working with animal tissues starts in 1984 .
And I started first with cow Achilles tendon , where we would take the cow Achilles tendon , which is type - I collagen , strip it of its antigens by degrading it with an acid and detergent wash and forming it into a regeneration template .
We would then take that regeneration template and insert it into the missing meniscus cartilage to regrow that in a patients knee .
Weve now done that procedure , and its been done worldwide in over 4,000 cases , so its an FDA - approved and worldwide - accepted way to regrow the meniscus .
And thats great when I can degrade the tissue .
But what happens for your ligament when I need an intact ligament ?
I cant grind it up in a blender .
So in that case , I have to design  -  -  and we designed with Uri Galili and Tom Turek  -  -  an enzyme wash to wash away , or strip , those galactosyl epitopes with a specific enzyme .
And we call that a  gal stripping  technique .
What we do is humanize the tissue .
Its by gal stripping that tissue we humanize it , and then we can put it back into a patients knee .
And weve done that . Now weve taken pig ligament  -  -  young , healthy , big tissue , put it into 10 patients in an FDA - approved trial  -  -  and then one of our patients went on to have three Canadian Masters Downhill championships  -  -  on his  pig - lig ,  as he calls it . So we know it can work .
And theres a wide clinical trial of this tissue now pending .
So what about the next step ?
What about getting to a total biologic knee replacement , not just the parts ?
How are we going to revolutionize artificial joint replacement ?
Well heres how were going to do it .
So what were going to do is take an articular cartilage from a young , healthy pig , strip it of its antigens , load it with your stem cells , then put it back on to that arthritic surface in your knee , tack it on there , have you heal that surface and then create a new biologic surface for your knee .
So thats our biologic approach right now .
Were going to rebuild your knee with the parts .
Were going to resurface it with a completely new surface .
But we have other advantages from the animal kingdom .
Theres a benefit of 400 million years of ambulation .
We can harness those benefits .
We can use thicker , younger , better tissues than you might have injured in your knee , or that you might have when youre 40 , 50 or 60 .
We can do it as an outpatient procedure .
We can strip that tissue very economically , and so this is how we can get biologic knee replacement to go global .
And so welcome to super biologics .
Its not hardware .
Its not software .
Its bioware .
Its version 2.0 of you .
And so with that , coming to a  -  -  coming to an operating theater near you soon , I believe .
Thank you very much .
Marcel Dicke : Why not eat insects ?
Marcel Dicke makes an appetizing case for adding insects to everyones diet . His message to squeamish chefs and foodies : delicacies like locusts and caterpillars compete with meat in flavor , nutrition and eco - friendliness .
Okay , Im going to show you again something about our diets .
And I would like to know what the audience is , and so who of you ever ate insects ?
Thats quite a lot .
But still , youre not representing the overall population of the Earth .
Because theres 80 percent out there that really eats insects .
But this is quite good .
Why not eat insects ? Well first , what are insects ?
Insects are animals that walk around on six legs .
And here you see just a selection .
Theres six million species of insects on this planet , six million species .
Theres a few hundreds of mammals  -  -  six million species of insects .
In fact , if we count all the individual organisms , we would come at much larger numbers .
In fact , of all animals on Earth , of all animal species , 80 percent walks on six legs .
But if we would count all the individuals , and we take an average weight of them , it would amount to something like 200 to 2,000 kilograms for each of you and me on Earth .
That means that in terms of biomass , insects are more abundant than we are , and were not on a planet of men , but were on a planet of insects .
Insects are not only there in nature , but they also are involved in our economy , usually without us knowing .
There was an estimation , a conservative estimation , a couple of years ago that the U.S . economy benefited by 57 billion dollars per year .
Its a number  -  -  very large  -  -  a contribution to the economy of the United States for free .
And so I looked up what the economy was paying for the war in Iraq in the same year .
It was 80 billion U.S . dollars .
Well we know that that was not a cheap war .
So insects , just for free , contribute to the economy of the United States with about the same order of magnitude , just for free , without everyone knowing .
And not only in the States , but in any country , in any economy .
What do they do ?
They remove dung , they pollinate our crops .
A third of all the fruits that we eat are all a result of insects taking care of the reproduction of plants .
They control pests , and theyre food for animals .
Theyre at the start of food chains .
Small animals eat insects .
Even larger animals eat insects .
But the small animals that eat insects are being eaten by larger animals , still larger animals .
And at the end of the food chain , we are eating them as well .
Theres quite a lot of people that are eating insects .
And here you see me in a small , provincial town in China , Lijiang  -  -  about two million inhabitants .
If you go out for dinner , like in a fish restaurant , where you can select which fish you want to eat , you can select which insects you would like to eat .
And they prepare it in a wonderful way .
And here you see me enjoying a meal with caterpillars , locusts , bee pupae  -  -  delicacies .
And you can eat something new everyday .
Theres more than 1,000 species of insects that are being eaten all around the globe .
Thats quite a bit more than just a few mammals that were eating , like a cow or a pig or a sheep .
More than 1,000 species  -  -  an enormous variety .
And now you may think , okay , in this provincial town in China theyre doing that , but not us .
Well weve seen already that quite some of you already ate insects maybe occasionally , but I can tell you that every one of you is eating insects , without any exception .
Youre eating at least 500 grams per year .
What are you eating ?
Tomato soup , peanut butter , chocolate , noodles  -  -  any processed food that youre eating contains insects , because insects are here all around us , and when theyre out there in nature theyre also in our crops .
Some fruits get some insect damage .
Those are the fruits , if theyre tomato , that go to the tomato soup .
If they dont have any damage , they go to the grocery .
And thats your view of a tomato .
But theres tomatoes that end up in a soup , and as long as they meet the requirements of the food agency , there can be all kinds of things in there , no problem .
In fact , why would we put these balls in the soup , theres meat in there anyway ?
In fact , all our processed foods contain more proteins than we would be aware of .
So anything is a good protein source already .
Now you may say ,  Okay , so were eating 500 grams just by accident . 
Were even doing this on purpose .
In a lot of food items that we have  -  -  I have only two items here on the slide  -  -  pink cookies or surimi sticks or , if you like , Campari  -  -  a lot of our food products that are of a red color are dyed with a natural dye .
The surimi sticks  of  crabmeat , or is being sold as crab meat , is white fish thats being dyed with cochineal .
Cochineal is a product of an insect that lives off these cacti .
Its being produced in large amounts , 150 to 180 metric tons per year in the Canary Islands in Peru , and its big business .
One gram of cochineal costs about 30 euros .
One gram of gold is 30 euros .
So its a very precious thing that were using to dye our foods .
Now the situation in the world is going to change for you and me , for everyone on this Earth .
The human population is growing very rapidly and is growing exponentially .
Where , at the moment , we have something between six and seven billion people , it will grow to about nine billion in 2050 .
That means that we have a lot more mouths to feed , and this is something that worries more and more people .
There was an FAO conference last October that was completely devoted to this .
How are we going to feed this world ?
And if you look at the figures up there , it says that we have a third more mouths to feed , but we need an agricultural production increase of 70 percent .
And thats especially because this world population is increasing , and its increasing , not only in numbers , but were also getting wealthier , and anyone that gets wealthier starts to eat more and also starts to eat more meat .
And meat , in fact , is something that costs a lot of our agricultural production .
Our diet consists ,  in  some part , of animal proteins , and at the moment , most of us here get it from livestock , from fish , from game .
And we eat quite a lot of it .
In the developed world its on average 80 kilograms per person per year , which goes up to 120 in the United States and a bit lower in some other countries , but on average 80 kilograms per person per year .
In the developing world its much lower .
Its 25 kilograms per person per year .
But its increasing enormously .
In China in the last 20 years , it increased from 20 to 50 , and its still increasing .
So if a third of the world population is going to increase its meat consumption from 25 to 80 on average , and a third of the world population is living in China and in India , were having an enormous demand on meat .
And of course , we are not there to say thats only for us , its not for them .
They have the same share that we have .
Now to start with , I should say that we are eating way too much meat in the Western world .
We could do with much , much less  -  -  and I know , Ive been a vegetarian for a long time , and you can easily do without anything .
Youll get proteins in any kind of food anyway .
But then theres a lot of problems that come with meat production , and were being faced with that more and more often .
The first problem that were facing is human health .
Pigs are quite like us .
Theyre even models in medicine , and we can even transplant organs from a pig to a human .
That means that pigs also share diseases with us .
And a pig disease , a pig virus , and a human virus can both proliferate , and because of their kind of reproduction , they can combine and produce a new virus .
This has happened in the Netherlands in the 1990s during the classical swine fever outbreak .
You get a new disease that can be deadly .
We eat insects  -  -  theyre so distantly related from us that this doesnt happen .
So thats one point for insects .
And theres the conversion factor .
You take 10 kilograms of feed , you can get one kilogram of beef , but you can get nine kilograms of locust meat .
So if you would be an entrepreneur , what would you do ?
With 10 kilograms of input , you can get either one or nine kg . of output .
So far were taking the one , or up to five kilograms of output .
Were not taking the bonus yet .
Were not taking the nine kilograms of output yet .
So thats two points for insects .
And theres the environment .
If we take 10 kilograms of food  -  -  and it results in one kilogram of beef , the other nine kilograms are waste , and a lot of that is manure .
If you produce insects , you have less manure per kilogram of meat that you produce .
So less waste .
Furthermore , per kilogram of manure , you have much , much less ammonia and fewer greenhouse gases when you have insect manure So you have less waste , and the waste that you have is not as environmental malign as it is with cow dung .
So thats three points for insects .
Now theres a big  if ,  of course , and it is if insects produce meat that is of good quality .
Well there have been all kinds of analyses and in terms of protein , or fat , or vitamins , its very good .
In fact , its comparable to anything we eat as meat at the moment .
And even in terms of calories , it is very good .
One kilogram of grasshoppers has the same amount of calories as 10 hot dogs , or six Big Macs .
So thats four points for insects .
I can go on , and I could make many more points for insects , but time doesnt allow this .
So the question is , why not eat insects ?
I gave you at least four arguments in favor .
Well have to .
Even if you dont like it , youll have to get used to this because at the moment , 70 percent of all our agricultural land is being used to produce livestock .
Thats not only the land where the livestock is walking and feeding , but its also other areas where the feed is being produced and being transported .
We can increase it a bit at the expense of rainforests , but theres a limitation very soon .
And if you remember that we need to increase agricultural production by 70 percent , were not going to make it that way .
We could much better change from meat , from beef , to insects .
And then 80 percent of the world already eats insects , so we are just a minority  -  -  in a country like the U.K . , the USA , the Netherlands , anywhere .
On the left - hand side , you see a market in Laos where they have abundantly present all kinds of insects that you choose for dinner for the night .
On the right - hand side you see a grasshopper .
So people there are eating them , not because theyre hungry , but because they think its a delicacy .
Its just very good food .
You can vary enormously .
It has many benefits .
In fact , we have delicacy thats very much like this grasshopper : shrimps , a delicacy being sold at a high price .
Who wouldnt like to eat a shrimp ?
There are a few people who dont like shrimp , but shrimp , or crabs , or crayfish , are very closely related .
They are delicacies .
In fact , a locust is a  shrimp  of the land , and it would make very good into our diet .
So why are we not eating insects yet ?
Well thats just a matter of mindset .
Were not used to it , and we see insects as these organisms that are very different from us .
Thats why were changing the perception of insects .
And Im working very hard with my colleague , Arnold van Huis , in telling people what insects are , what magnificent things they are , what magnificent jobs they do in nature .
And in fact , without insects , we would not be here in this room , because if the insects die out , we will soon die out as well .
If we die out , the insects will continue very happily .
So we have to get used to the idea of eating insects .
And some might think , well theyre not yet available .
Well they are .
There are entrepreneurs in the Netherlands that produce them , and one of them is here in the audience , Marian Peeters , whos in the picture .
I predict that later this year , youll get them in the supermarkets  -  -  not visible , but as animal protein in the food .
And maybe by 2020 , youll buy them just knowing that this is an insect that youre going to eat .
And theyre being made in the most wonderful ways .
A Dutch chocolate maker .
So theres even a lot of design to it .
Well in the Netherlands , we have an innovative Minister of Agriculture , and she puts the insects on the menu in her restaurant in her ministry .
And when she got all the Ministers of Agriculture of the E.U .
over to the Hague recently , she went to a high - class restaurant , and they ate insects all together .
Its not something that is a hobby of mine .
Its really taken off the ground .
So why not eat insects ?
You should try it yourself .
A couple of years ago , we had 1,750 people all together in a square in Wageningen town , and they ate insects at the same moment , and this was still big , big news .
I think soon it will not be big news anymore when we all eat insects , because its just a normal way of doing .
So you can try it yourself today , and I would say , enjoy .
And Im going to show to Bruno some first tries , and he can have the first bite .
Look at them first . Look at them first .
Marcel Dicke : Its all protein .
Thats exactly the same  one  you saw in the video actually .
And it looks delicious .
They just make it  with  nuts or something .
MD : Thank you .
Cameron Sinclair : The refugees of boom - and - bust
At TEDGlobal U , Cameron Sinclair shows the unreported cost of real estate megaprojects gone bust : thousands of migrant construction laborers left stranded and penniless . To his fellow architects , he says there is only one ethical response .
A few years ago , my eyes were opened to the dark side of the construction industry .
In 2006 , young Qatari students took me to go and see the migrant worker camps .
And since then Ive followed the unfolding issue of worker rights .
In the last six months , more than 300 skyscrapers in the UAE have been put on hold or canceled .
Behind the headlines that lay behind these buildings is the fate of the often - indentured construction worker .
1.1 million of them .
Mainly Indian , Pakistani , Sri Lankan and Nepalese , these laborers risk everything to make money for their families back home .
They pay a middle - man thousands of dollars to be there .
And when they arrive , they find themselves in labor camps with no water , no air conditioning , and their passports taken away .
While its easy to point the finger at local officials and higher authorities , 99 percent of these people are hired by the private sector , and so therefore were equally , if not more , accountable .
Groups like Buildsafe UAE have emerged , but the numbers are simply overwhelming .
In August 2008 , UAE public officials noted that 40 percent of the countrys 1,098 labor camps had violated minimum health and fire safety regulations .
And last summer , more than 10,000 workers protested for the non - payment of wages , for the poor quality of food , and inadequate housing .
And then the financial collapse happened .
When the contractors have gone bust , as theyve been overleveraged like everyone else , the difference is everything goes missing , documentation , passports , and tickets home for these workers .
Currently , right now , thousands of workers are abandoned .
There is no way back home .
And there is no way , and no proof of arrival .
These are the boom - and - bust refugees .
The question is , as a building professional , as an architect , an engineer , as a developer , if you know this is going on , as we go to the sights every single week , are you complacent or complicit in the human rights violations ?
So lets forget your environmental footprint .
Lets think about your ethical footprint .
What good is it to build a zero - carbon , energy efficient complex , when the labor producing this architectural gem is unethical at best ?
Now , recently Ive been told Ive been taking the high road .
But , quite frankly , on this issue , there is no other road .
So lets not forget who is really paying the price of this financial collapse .
And that as we worry about our next job in the office , the next design that we can get , to keep our workers .
Lets not forget these men , who are truly dying to work .
Thank you .
Kevin Surace : Eco - friendly drywall
Kevin Surace suggests we rethink basic construction materials  -  -  such as the familiar wallboard  -  -  to reduce the huge carbon footprint generated by the manufacturing and construction of our buildings . He introduces EcoRock , a clean , recyclable and energy - efficient drywall created by his team at Serious Materials .
Whats happening to the climate ?
It is unbelievably bad .
This is , obviously , that famous view now of the Arctic , which is likely to be gone at this point in the next three or four or five years . Very , very , very scary .
So we all look at what we can do .
And when you look at the worldwide sources of CO2 , 52 percent are tied to buildings .
Only nine percent is passenger cars , interestingly enough .
So we ran off to a sushi bar .
And at that sushi bar we came up with a great idea .
And it was something called EcoRock .
And we said we could redesign the 115 - year - old gypsum drywall process that generates 20 billion pounds of CO2 a year .
So it was a big idea . We wanted to reduce that by 80 percent , which is exactly what weve done .
We started R and D in 2006 .
Decided to use recycled content from cement and steel manufacturing .
There is the inside of our lab . We havent shown this before .
But our people had to do some 5,000 different mixes to get this right , to hit our targets .
And they worked absolutely very , very , very hard .
So then we went forward and built our production line in China .
We dont build this production equipment any longer in the U.S . , unfortunately .
We did the line install over the summer .
We started right there , with absolutely nothing .
Youre seeing for the first time , a brand new drywall production line , not made using gypsum at all .
Thats the finished production line there .
We got our first panel out on December third .
That is the slurry being poured onto paper , basically . Thats the line running .
The exciting thing is , look at the faces of the people .
These are people who worked this project for two to three years .
And they are so excited . Thats the first board off the line .
Our Vice President of Operation kissing the board . Obviously very , very excited .
But this has a huge , huge impact on the environment .
We signed the first panel just a few weeks after that , had a great signing ceremony , leading to people hopefully using these products across the world .
And weve got Cradle - to - Cradle Gold on this thing .
We happened to win , just recently , the Green Product of the Year for  The Re - Invention of Drywall ,  from Popular Science .
Thank you . Thank you .
So here is what we learned : 8,000 gallons of gas equivalent to build one house .
You probably had no idea . Its like driving around the world six times .
We must change everything .
Look around the room : chairs , wood , everything around us has to change or were not going to lick this problem .
Dont listen to the people who say you cant do this , because anyone can .
And these job losses , we can fix them with green - collar jobs .
Weve got four plants . Were building this stuff around the country .
Were going as fast as we can .
Two and a half million cars worth of gypsum , you know , CO2 generated . Right ?
So what will you do ? Ill tell you what I did and why I did it . And I know my times up .
Those are my kids , Natalie and David .
When they have their kids , 2050 , theyd better look back at Grandpa and say ,  Hey , you gave it a good shot . You did the best you could with the team that you had . 
So my hope is that when you leave TED , you will look at reducing your carbon footprint in however you can do it .
And if you dont know how , please find me  -  -  I will help you .
Last but not least , Bill Gates , I know you invented Windows .
Wait till you see , maybe next year , what kind of windows weve invented .
Thank you so much .
Shigeru Ban : Emergency shelters made from paper
Long before sustainability was a buzzword , Pritzker Prize - winning architect Shigeru Ban had begun his experiments with ecologically sound building materials such as cardboard tubes . His remarkable structures are often intended as temporary housing for disaster - struck nations such as Haiti , Rwanda , Japan . Yet often the buildings remain a beloved part of the landscape long after they have served their intended purpose .
Hi . I am an architect .
I am the only architect in the world making buildings out of paper like this cardboard tube , and this exhibition is the first one I did using paper tubes .
1986 , much , much longer before people started talking about ecological issues and environmental issues , I just started testing the paper tube in order to use this as a building structure .
Its very complicated to test the new material for the building , but this is much stronger than I expected , and also its very easy to waterproof , and also , because its industrial material , its also possible to fireproof .
Then I built the temporary structure , 1990 .
This is the first temporary building made out of paper .
There are 330 tubes , diameter 55  centimeters  , there are only 12 tubes with a diameter of 120 centimeters , or four feet , wide .
As you see it in the photo , inside is the toilet .
In case youre finished with toilet paper , you can tear off the inside of the wall .
So its very useful .
Year 2000 , there was a big expo in Germany .
I was asked to design the building , because the theme of the expo was environmental issues .
So I was chosen to build the pavilion out of paper tubes , recyclable paper .
My goal of the design is not when its completed .
My goal was when the building was demolished , because each country makes a lot of pavilions but after half a year , we create a lot of industrial waste , so my building has to be reused or recycled .
After , the building was recycled .
So that was the goal of my design .
Then I was very lucky to win the competition to build the second Pompidou Center in France in the city of Metz .
Because I was so poor , I wanted to rent an office in Paris , but I couldnt afford it , so I decided to bring my students to Paris to build our office on top of the Pompidou Center in Paris by ourselves .
So we brought the paper tubes and the wooden joints to complete the 35 - meter - long office .
We stayed there for six years without paying any rent .
Thank you . I had one big problem .
Because we were part of the exhibition , even if my friend wanted to see me , they had to buy a ticket to see me .
That was the problem .
Then I completed the Pompidou Center in Metz .
Its a very popular museum now , and I created a big monument for the government .
But then I was very disappointed at my profession as an architect , because we are not helping , we are not working for society , but we are working for privileged people , rich people , government , developers .
They have money and power .
Those are invisible .
So they hire us to visualize their power and money by making monumental architecture .
That is our profession , even historically its the same , even now we are doing the same .
So I was very disappointed that we are not working for society , even though there are so many people who lost their houses by natural disasters .
But I must say they are no longer natural disasters .
For example , earthquakes never kill people , but collapse of the buildings kill people .
Thats the responsibility of architects .
Then people need some temporary housing , but there are no architects working there because we are too busy working for privileged people .
So I thought , even as architects , we can be involved in the reconstruction of temporary housing .
We can make it better .
So that is why I started working in disaster areas .
1994 , there was a big disaster in Rwanda , Africa .
Two tribes , Hutu and Tutsi , fought each other .
Over two million people became refugees .
But I was so surprised to see the shelter , refugee camp organized by the U.N .
Theyre so poor , and they are freezing with blankets during the rainy season , In the shelters built by the U.N . , they were just providing a plastic sheet , and the refugees had to cut the trees , and just like this .
But over two million people cut trees .
It just became big , heavy deforestation and an environmental problem .
That is why they started providing aluminum pipes , aluminum barracks .
Very expensive , they throw them out for money , then cutting trees again .
So I proposed my idea to improve the situation using these recycled paper tubes because this is so cheap and also so strong , but my budget is only 50 U.S . dollars per unit .
We built 50 units to do that as a monitoring test for the durability and moisture and termites , so on .
And then , year afterward , 1995 , in Kobe , Japan , we had a big earthquake .
Nearly 7,000 people were killed , and the city like this Nagata district , all the city was burned in a fire after the earthquake .
And also I found out theres many Vietnamese refugees suffering and gathering at a Catholic church  -  -  all the building was totally destroyed .
So I went there and also I proposed to the priests ,  Why dont we rebuild the church out of paper tubes ? 
And he said ,  Oh God , are you crazy ?
After a fire , what are you proposing ? 
So he never trusted me , but I didnt give up .
I started commuting to Kobe , and I met the society of Vietnamese people .
They were living like this with very poor plastic sheets in the park .
So I proposed to rebuild . I raised  -  -  did fundraising .
I made a paper tube shelter for them , and in order to make it easy to be built by students and also easy to demolish , I used beer crates as a foundation .
I asked the Kirin beer company to propose , because at that time , the Asahi beer company made their plastic beer crates red , which doesnt go with the color of the paper tubes .
The color coordination is very important .
And also I still remember , we were expecting to have a beer inside the plastic beer crate , but it came empty .
So I remember it was so disappointing .
So during the summer with my students , we built over 50 units of the shelters .
Finally the priest , finally he trusted me to rebuild .
He said ,  As long as you collect money by yourself , bring your students to build , you can do it . 
So we spent five weeks rebuilding the church .
It was meant to stay there for three years , but actually it stayed there 10 years because people loved it .
Then , in Taiwan , they had a big earthquake , and we proposed to donate this church , so we dismantled them , we sent them over to be built by volunteer people .
It stayed there in Taiwan as a permanent church even now .
So this building became a permanent building .
Then I wonder , what is a permanent and what is a temporary building ?
Even a building made in paper can be permanent as long as people love it .
Even a concrete building can be very temporary if that is made to make money .
In 1999 , in Turkey , the big earthquake , I went there to use the local material to build a shelter .
2001 , in West India , I built also a shelter .
In 2004 , in Sri Lanka , after the Sumatra earthquake and tsunami , I rebuilt Islamic fishermens villages .
And in 2008 , in Chengdu , Sichuan area in China , nearly 70,000 people were killed , and also especially many of the schools were destroyed because of the corruption between the authority and the contractor .
I was asked to rebuild the temporary church .
I brought my Japanese students to work with the Chinese students .
In one month , we completed nine classrooms , over 500 square meters .
Its still used , even after the current earthquake in China .
In 2009 , in Italy , LAquila , also they had a big earthquake .
And this is a very interesting photo : former Prime Minister Berlusconi and Japanese former former former former Prime Minister Mr. Aso  -  -  you know , because we have to change the prime minister ever year .
And they are very kind , affording my model .
I proposed a big rebuilding , a temporary music hall , because LAquila is very famous for music and all the concert halls were destroyed , so musicians were moving out .
So I proposed to the mayor , Id like to rebuild the temporary auditorium .
He said ,  As long as you bring your money , you can do it . 
And I was very lucky .
Mr. Berlusconi brought G8 summit , and our former prime minister came , so they helped us to collect money , and I got half a million euros from the Japanese government to rebuild this temporary auditorium .
Year 2010 in Haiti , there was a big earthquake , but its impossible to fly over , so I went to Santo Domingo , next - door country , to drive six hours to get to Haiti with the local students in Santo Domingo to build 50 units of shelter out of local paper tubes .
This is what happened in Japan two years ago , in northern Japan .
After the earthquake and tsunami , people had to be evacuated in a big room like a gymnasium .
But look at this . Theres no privacy .
People suffer mentally and physically .
So we went there to build partitions with all the student volunteers with paper tubes , just a very simple shelter out of the tube frame and the curtain .
However , some of the facility authority doesnt want us to do it , because , they said , simply , its become more difficult to control them .
But its really necessary to do it .
They dont have enough flat area to build standard government single - story housing like this one .
Look at this . Even civil government is doing such poor construction of the temporary housing , so dense and so messy because there is no storage , nothing , water is leaking , so I thought , we have to make multi - story building because theres no land and also its not very comfortable .
So I proposed to the mayor while I was making partitions .
Finally I met a very nice mayor in Onagawa village in Miyagi .
He asked me to build three - story housing on baseball  fields  .
I used the shipping container and also the students helped us to make all the building furniture to make them comfortable , within the budget of the government but also the area of the house is exactly the same , but much more comfortable .
Many of the people want to stay here forever .
I was very happy to hear that .
Now I am working in New Zealand , Christchurch .
About 20 days before the Japanese earthquake happened , also they had a big earthquake , and many Japanese students were also killed , and the most important cathedral of the city , the symbol of Christchurch , was totally destroyed .
And I was asked to come to rebuild the temporary cathedral .
So this is under construction .
And Id like to keep building monuments that are beloved by people .
Thank you very much .
Thank you .
Thank you very much .
Neil Burgess : How your brain tells you where you are
How do you remember where you parked your car ? How do you know if youre moving in the right direction ? Neuroscientist Neil Burgess studies the neural mechanisms that map the space around us , and how they link to memory and imagination .
When we park in a big parking lot , how do we remember where we parked our car ?
Heres the problem facing Homer .
And were going to try to understand whats happening in his brain .
So well start with the hippocampus , shown in yellow , which is the organ of memory .
If you have damage there , like in Alzheimers , you cant remember things including where you parked your car .
Its named after Latin for  seahorse ,  which it resembles .
And like the rest of the brain , its made of neurons .
So the human brain has about a hundred billion neurons in it .
And the neurons communicate with each other by sending little pulses or spikes of electricity via connections to each other .
The hippocampus is formed of two sheets of cells , which are very densely interconnected .
And scientists have begun to understand how spatial memory works by recording from individual neurons in rats or mice while they forage or explore an environment looking for food .
So were going to imagine were recording from a single neuron in the hippocampus of this rat here .
And when it fires a little spike of electricity , theres going to be a red dot and a click .
So what we see is that this neuron knows whenever the rat has gone into one particular place in its environment .
And it signals to the rest of the brain by sending a little electrical spike .
So we could show the firing rate of that neuron as a function of the animals location .
And if we record from lots of different neurons , well see that different neurons fire when the animal goes in different parts of its environment , like in this square box shown here .
So together they form a map for the rest of the brain , telling the brain continually ,  Where am I now within my environment ? 
Place cells are also being recorded in humans .
So epilepsy patients sometimes need the electrical activity in their brain monitoring .
And some of these patients played a video game where they drive around a small town .
And place cells in their hippocampi would fire , become active , start sending electrical impulses whenever they drove through a particular location in that town .
So how does a place cell know where the rat or person is within its environment ?
Well these two cells here show us that the boundaries of the environment are particularly important .
So the one on the top likes to fire sort of midway between the walls of the box that their rats in .
And when you expand the box , the firing location expands .
The one below likes to fire whenever theres a wall close by to the south .
And if you put another wall inside the box , then the cell fires in both place wherever theres a wall to the south as the animal explores around in its box .
So this predicts that sensing the distances and directions of boundaries around you  -  -  extended buildings and so on  -  -  is particularly important for the hippocampus .
And indeed , on the inputs to the hippocampus , cells are found which project into the hippocampus , which do respond exactly to detecting boundaries or edges at particular distances and directions from the rat or mouse as its exploring around .
So the cell on the left , you can see , it fires whenever the animal gets near to a wall or a boundary to the east , whether its the edge or the wall of a square box or the circular wall of the circular box or even the drop at the edge of a table , which the animals are running around .
And the cell on the right there fires whenever theres a boundary to the south , whether its the drop at the edge of the table or a wall or even the gap between two tables that are pulled apart .
So thats one way in which we think place cells determine where the animal is as its exploring around .
We can also test where we think objects are , like this goal flag , in simple environments  -  -  or indeed , where your car would be .
So we can have people explore an environment and see the location they have to remember .
And then , if we put them back in the environment , generally theyre quite good at putting a marker down where they thought that flag or their car was .
But on some trials , we could change the shape and size of the environment like we did with the place cell .
In that case , we can see how where they think the flag had been changes as a function of how you change the shape and size of the environment .
And what you see , for example , if the flag was where that cross was in a small square environment , and then if you ask people where it was , but youve made the environment bigger , where they think the flag had been stretches out in exactly the same way that the place cell firing stretched out .
Its as if you remember where the flag was by storing the pattern of firing across all of your place cells at that location , and then you can get back to that location by moving around so that you best match the current pattern of firing of your place cells with that stored pattern .
That guides you back to the location that you want to remember .
But we also know where we are through movement .
So if we take some outbound path  -  -  perhaps we park and we wander off  -  -  we know because our own movements , which we can integrate over this path roughly what the heading direction is to go back .
And place cells also get this kind of path integration input from a kind of cell called a grid cell .
Now grid cells are found , again , on the inputs to the hippocampus , and theyre a bit like place cells .
But now as the rat explores around , each individual cell fires in a whole array of different locations which are laid out across the environment in an amazingly regular triangular grid .
And if you record from several grid cells  -  -  shown here in different colors  -  -  each one has a grid - like firing pattern across the environment , and each cells grid - like firing pattern is shifted slightly relative to the other cells .
So the red one fires on this grid and the green one on this one and the blue on on this one .
So together , its as if the rat can put a virtual grid of firing locations across its environment  -  -  a bit like the latitude and longitude lines that youd find on a map , but using triangles .
And as it moves around , the electrical activity can pass from one of these cells to the next cell to keep track of where it is , so that it can use its own movements to know where it is in its environment .
Do people have grid cells ?
Well because all of the grid - like firing patterns have the same axes of symmetry , the same orientations of grid , shown in orange here , it means that the net activity of all of the grid cells in a particular part of the brain should change according to whether were running along these six directions or running along one of the six directions in between .
So we can put people in an MRI scanner and have them do a little video game like the one I showed you and look for this signal .
And indeed , you do see it in the human entorhinal cortex , which is the same part of the brain that you see grid cells in rats .
So back to Homer .
Hes probably remembering where his car was in terms of the distances and directions to extended buildings and boundaries around the location where he parked .
And that would be represented by the firing of boundary - detecting cells .
Hes also remembering the path he took out of the car park , which would be represented in the firing of grid cells .
Now both of these kinds of cells can make the place cells fire .
And he can return to the location where he parked by moving so as to find where it is that best matches the firing pattern of the place cells in his brain currently with the stored pattern where he parked his car .
And that guides him back to that location irrespective of visual cues like whether his cars actually there .
Maybe its been towed .
But he knows where it was , so he knows to go and get it .
So beyond spatial memory , if we look for this grid - like firing pattern throughout the whole brain , we see it in a whole series of locations which are always active when we do all kinds of autobiographical memory tasks , like remembering the last time you went to a wedding , for example .
So it may be that the neural mechanisms for representing the space around us are also used for generating visual imagery so that we can recreate the spatial scene , at least , of the events that have happened to us when we want to imagine them .
So if this was happening , your memories could start by place cells activating each other via these dense interconnections and then reactivating boundary cells to create the spatial structure of the scene around your viewpoint .
And grid cells could move this viewpoint through that space .
Another kind of cell , head direction cells , which I didnt mention yet , they fire like a compass according to which way youre facing .
They could define the viewing direction from which you want to generate an image for your visual imagery , so you can imagine what happened when you were at this wedding , for example .
So this is just one example of a new era really in cognitive neuroscience where were beginning to understand psychological processes like how you remember or imagine or even think in terms of the actions of the billions of individual neurons that make up our brains .
Thank you very much .
Nigel Marsh : How to make work - life balance work
Work - life balance , says Nigel Marsh , is too important to be left in the hands of your employer . Marsh lays out an ideal day balanced between family time , personal time and productivity  -  -  and offers some stirring encouragement to make it happen .
What I thought I would do is I would start with a simple request .
Id like all of you to pause for a moment , you wretched weaklings , and take stock of your miserable existence .
Now that was the advice that St . Benedict gave his rather startled followers in the fifth century .
It was the advice that I decided to follow myself when I turned 40 .
Up until that moment , I had been that classic corporate warrior  -  -  I was eating too much , I was drinking too much , I was working too hard and I was neglecting the family .
And I decided that I would try and turn my life around .
In particular , I decided I would try to address the thorny issue of work - life balance .
So I stepped back from the workforce , and I spent a year at home with my wife and four young children .
But all I learned about work - life balance from that year was that I found it quite easy to balance work and life when I didnt have any work .
Not a very useful skill , especially when the money runs out .
So I went back to work , and Ive spent these seven years since struggling with , studying and writing about work - life balance .
And I have four observations Id like to share with you today .
The first is : if societys to make any progress on this issue , we need an honest debate .
But the trouble is so many people talk so much rubbish about work - life balance .
All the discussions about flexi - time or dress - down Fridays or paternity leave only serve to mask the core issue , which is that certain job and career choices are fundamentally incompatible with being meaningfully engaged on a day - to - day basis with a young family .
Now the first step in solving any problem is acknowledging the reality of the situation youre in .
And the reality of the society that were in is there are thousands and thousands of people out there leading lives of quiet , screaming desperation , where they work long , hard hours at jobs they hate to enable them to buy things they dont need to impress people they dont like .
Its my contention that going to work on Friday in jeans and  a  T - shirt isnt really getting to the nub of the issue .
The second observation Id like to make is we need to face the truth that governments and corporations arent going to solve this issue for us .
We should stop looking outside .
Its up to us as individuals to take control and responsibility for the type of lives that we want to lead .
If you dont design your life , someone else will design it for you , and you may just not like their idea of balance .
Its particularly important  -  -  this isnt on the World Wide Web , is it ? Im about to get fired  -  -  its particularly important that you never put the quality of your life in the hands of a commercial corporation .
Now Im not talking here just about the bad companies  -  -  the  abattoirs of the human soul ,  as I call them .
Im talking about all companies .
Because commercial companies are inherently designed to get as much out of you  as  they can get away with .
Its in their nature ; its in their DNA ; its what they do  -  -  even the good , well - intentioned companies .
On the one hand , putting childcare facilities in the workplace is wonderful and enlightened .
On the other hand , its a nightmare  -  -  it just means you spend more time at the bloody office .
We have to be responsible for setting and enforcing the boundaries that we want in our life .
The third observation is we have to be careful with the time frame that we choose upon which to judge our balance .
Before I went back to work after my year at home , I sat down and I wrote out a detailed , step - by - step description of the ideal balanced day that I aspired to .
And it went like this : wake up well rested after a good nights sleep .
Have sex .
Walk the dog .
Have breakfast with my wife and children .
Have sex again .
Drive the kids to school on the way to the office .
Do three hours work .
Play a sport with a friend at lunchtime .
Do another three hours work .
Meet some mates in the pub for an early evening drink .
Drive home for dinner with my wife and kids .
Meditate for half an hour .
Have sex .
Walk the dog . Have sex again .
Go to bed .
How often do you think I have that day ?
We need to be realistic .
You cant do it all in one day .
We need to elongate the time frame upon which we judge the balance in our life , but we need to elongate it without falling into the trap of the  Ill have a life when I retire , when my kids have left home , when my wife has divorced me , my health is failing , Ive got no mates or interests left . 
A day is too short ;  after I retire  is too long .
Theres got to be a middle way .
A fourth observation : We need to approach balance in a balanced way .
A friend came to see me last year  -  -  and she doesnt mind me telling this story  -  -  a friend came to see me last year and said ,  Nigel , Ive read your book .
And I realize that my life is completely out of balance .
Its totally dominated by work .
I work 10 hours a day ; I commute two hours a day .
All of my relationships have failed .
Theres nothing in my life apart from my work .
So Ive decided to get a grip and sort it out .
So I joined a gym . 
Now I dont mean to mock , but being a fit 10 - hour - a - day office rat isnt more balanced ; its more fit .
Lovely though physical exercise may be , there are other parts to life  -  -  theres the intellectual side ; theres the emotional side ; theres the spiritual side .
And to be balanced , I believe we have to attend to all of those areas  -  -  not just do 50 stomach crunches .
Now that can be daunting .
Because people say ,  Bloody hell mate , I havent got time to get fit .
You want me to go to church and call my mother . 
And I understand .
I truly understand how that can be daunting .
But an incident that happened a couple of years ago gave me a new perspective .
My wife , who is somewhere in the audience today , called me up at the office and said ,  Nigel , you need to pick our youngest son   -  -  Harry  -  -   up from school . 
Because she had to be somewhere else with the other three children for that evening .
So I left work an hour early that afternoon and picked Harry up at the school gates .
We walked down to the local park , messed around on the swings , played some silly games .
I then walked him up the hill to the local cafe , and we shared a pizza for two , then walked down the hill to our home , and I gave him his bath and put him in his Batman pajamas .
I then read him a chapter of Roald Dahls  James and the Giant Peach . 
I then put him to bed , tucked him in , gave him a kiss on his forehead and said ,  Goodnight , mate ,  and walked out of his bedroom .
As I was walking out of his bedroom , he said ,  Dad ?  I went ,  Yes , mate ? 
He went ,  Dad , this has been the best day of my life , ever . 
I hadnt done anything , hadnt taken him to Disney World or bought him a Playstation .
Now my point is the small things matter .
Being more balanced doesnt mean dramatic upheaval in your life .
With the smallest investment in the right places , you can radically transform the quality of your relationships and the quality of your life .
Moreover , I think , it can transform society .
Because if enough people do it , we can change societys definition of success away from the moronically simplistic notion that the person with the most money when he dies wins , to a more thoughtful and balanced definition of what a life well lived looks like .
And that , I think , is an idea worth spreading .
Sam Harris : Science can answer moral questions
Questions of good and evil , right and wrong are commonly thought unanswerable by science . But Sam Harris argues that science can  -  -  and should  -  -  be an authority on moral issues , shaping human values and setting out what constitutes a good life .
Im going to speak today about the relationship between science and human values .
Now , its generally understood that questions of morality  -  -  questions of good and evil and right and wrong  -  -  are questions about which science officially has no opinion .
Its thought that science can help us get what we value , but it can never tell us what we ought to value .
And , consequently , most people  -  -  I think most people probably here  -  -  think that science will never answer the most important questions in human life : questions like ,  What is worth living for ? 
 What is worth dying for ? 
 What constitutes a good life ? 
So , Im going to argue that this is an illusion  -  -  that the separation between science and human values is an illusion  -  -  and actually quite a dangerous one at this point in human history .
Now , its often said that science can not give us a foundation for morality and human values , because science deals with facts , and facts and values seem to belong to different spheres .
Its often thought that theres no description of the way the world is that can tell us how the world ought to be .
But I think this is quite clearly untrue .
Values are a certain kind of fact .
They are facts about the well - being of conscious creatures .
Why is it that we dont have ethical obligations toward rocks ?
Why dont we feel compassion for rocks ?
Its because we dont think rocks can suffer . And if were more concerned about our fellow primates than we are about insects , as indeed we are , its because we think theyre exposed to a greater range of potential happiness and suffering .
Now , the crucial thing to notice here is that this is a factual claim : This is something that we could be right or wrong about . And if we have misconstrued the relationship between biological complexity and the possibilities of experience well then we could be wrong about the inner lives of insects .
And theres no notion , no version of human morality and human values that Ive ever come across that is not at some point reducible to a concern about conscious experience and its possible changes .
Even if you get your values from religion , even if you think that good and evil ultimately relate to conditions after death  -  -  either to an eternity of happiness with God or an eternity of suffering in hell  -  -  you are still concerned about consciousness and its changes .
And to say that such changes can persist after death is itself a factual claim , which , of course , may or may not be true .
Now , to speak about the conditions of well - being in this life , for human beings , we know that there is a continuum of such facts .
We know that its possible to live in a failed state , where everything that can go wrong does go wrong  -  -  where mothers can not feed their children , where strangers can not find the basis for peaceful collaboration , where people are murdered indiscriminately .
And we know that its possible to move along this continuum towards something quite a bit more idyllic , to a place where a conference like this is even conceivable .
And we know  -  -  we know  -  -  that there are right and wrong answers to how to move in this space .
Would adding cholera to the water be a good idea ?
Probably not .
Would it be a good idea for everyone to believe in the evil eye , so that when bad things happened to them they immediately blame their neighbors ? Probably not .
There are truths to be known about how human communities flourish , whether or not we understand these truths .
And morality relates to these truths .
So , in talking about values we are talking about facts .
Now , of course our situation in the world can be understood at many levels  -  -  from the level of the genome on up to the level of economic systems and political arrangements .
But if were going to talk about human well - being we are , of necessity , talking about the human brain .
Because we know that our experience of the world and of ourselves within it is realized in the brain  -  -  whatever happens after death .
Even if the suicide bomber does get 72 virgins in the afterlife , in this life , his personality  -  -  his rather unfortunate personality  -  -  is the product of his brain .
So the contributions of culture  -  -  if culture changes us , as indeed it does , it changes us by changing our brains .
And so therefore whatever cultural variation there is in how human beings flourish can , at least in principle , be understood in the context of a maturing science of the mind  -  -  neuroscience , psychology , etc .
So , what Im arguing is that values reduced to facts  -  -  to facts about the conscious experience of conscious beings .
And we can therefore visualize a space of possible changes in the experience of these beings .
And I think of this as kind of a moral landscape , with peaks and valleys that correspond to differences in the well - being of conscious creatures , both personal and collective .
And one thing to notice is that perhaps there are states of human well - being that we rarely access , that few people access .
And these await our discovery .
Perhaps some of these states can be appropriately called mystical or spiritual .
Perhaps there are other states that we cant access because of how our minds are structured but other minds possibly could access them .
Now , let me be clear about what Im not saying . Im not saying that science is guaranteed to map this space , or that we will have scientific answers to every conceivable moral question .
I dont think , for instance , that you will one day consult a supercomputer to learn whether you should have a second child , or whether we should bomb Irans nuclear facilities , or whether you can deduct the full cost of TED as a business expense .
But if questions affect human well - being then they do have answers , whether or not we can find them .
And just admitting this  -  -  just admitting that there are right and wrong answers to the question of how humans flourish  -  -  will change the way we talk about morality , and will change our expectations of human cooperation in the future .
For instance , there are 21 states in our country where corporal punishment in the classroom is legal , where it is legal for a teacher to beat a child with a wooden board , hard , and raising large bruises and blisters and even breaking the skin .
And hundreds of thousands of children , incidentally , are subjected to this every year .
The locations of these enlightened districts , I think , will fail to surprise you .
Were not talking about Connecticut .
And the rationale for this behavior is explicitly religious .
The creator of the universe himself has told us not to spare the rod , lest we spoil the child  -  -  this is in Proverbs 13 and 20 , and I believe , 23 .
But we can ask the obvious question : Is it a good idea , generally speaking , to subject children to pain and violence and public humiliation as a way of encouraging healthy emotional development and good behavior ?
Is there any doubt that this question has an answer , and that it matters ?
Now , many of you might worry that the notion of well - being is truly undefined , and seemingly perpetually open to be re - construed .
And so , how therefore can there be an objective notion of well - being ?
Well , consider by analogy , the concept of physical health .
The concept of physical health is undefined .
As we just heard from Michael Specter , it has changed over the years .
When this statue was carved the average life expectancy was probably 30 .
Its now around 80 in the developed world .
There may come a time when we meddle with our genomes in such a way that not being able to run a marathon at age 200 will be considered a profound disability .
People will send you donations when youre in that condition .
Notice that the fact that the concept of health is open , genuinely open for revision , does not make it vacuous .
The distinction between a healthy person and a dead one is about as clear and consequential as any we make in science .
Another thing to notice is there may be many peaks on the moral landscape : There may be equivalent ways to thrive ; there may be equivalent ways to organize a human society so as to maximize human flourishing .
Now , why wouldnt this undermine an objective morality ?
Well think of how we talk about food : I would never be tempted to argue to you that there must be one right food to eat .
There is clearly a range of materials that constitute healthy food .
But theres nevertheless a clear distinction between food and poison .
The fact that there are many right answers to the question ,  What is food ? 
does not tempt us to say that there are no truths to be known about human nutrition .
Many people worry that a universal morality would require moral precepts that admit of no exceptions .
So , for instance , if its really wrong to lie , it must always be wrong to lie , and if you can find an exception , well then theres no such thing as moral truth .
Why would we think this ?
Consider , by analogy , the game of chess .
Now , if youre going to play good chess , a principle like ,  Dont lose your Queen ,  is very good to follow .
But it clearly admits some exceptions .
There are moments when losing your Queen is a brilliant thing to do .
There are moments when it is the only good thing you can do .
And yet , chess is a domain of perfect objectivity .
The fact that there are exceptions here does not change that at all .
Now , this brings us to the sorts of moves that people are apt to make in the moral sphere .
Consider the great problem of womens bodies : What to do about them ?
Well this is one thing you can do about them : You can cover them up .
Now , it is the position , generally speaking , of our intellectual community that while we may not like this , we might think of this as  wrong  in Boston or Palo Alto , who are we to say that the proud denizens of an ancient culture are wrong to force their wives and daughters to live in cloth bags ?
And who are we to say , even , that theyre wrong to beat them with lengths of steel cable , or throw battery acid in their faces if they decline the privilege of being smothered in this way ?
Well , who are we not to say this ?
Who are we to pretend that we know so little about human well - being that we have to be non - judgmental about a practice like this ?
Im not talking about voluntary wearing of a veil  -  -  women should be able to wear whatever they want , as far as Im concerned .
But what does voluntary mean in a community where , when a girl gets raped , her fathers first impulse , rather often , is to murder her out of shame ?
Just let that fact detonate in your brain for a minute : Your daughter gets raped , and what you want to do is kill her .
What are the chances that represents a peak of human flourishing ?
Now , to say this is not to say that we have got the perfect solution in our own society .
For instance , this is what its like to go to a newsstand almost anywhere in the civilized world .
Now , granted , for many men it may require a degree in philosophy to see something wrong with these images .
But if we are in a reflective mood , we can ask ,  Is this the perfect expression of psychological balance with respect to variables like youth and beauty and womens bodies ? 
I mean , is this the optimal environment in which to raise our children ?
Probably not . OK , so perhaps theres some place on the spectrum between these two extremes that represents a place of better balance .
Perhaps there are many such places  -  -  again , given other changes in human culture there may be many peaks on the moral landscape .
But the thing to notice is that there will be many more ways not to be on a peak .
Now the irony , from my perspective , is that the only people who seem to generally agree with me and who think that there are right and wrong answers to moral questions are religious demagogues of one form or another .
And of course they think they have right answers to moral questions because they got these answers from a voice in a whirlwind , not because they made an intelligent analysis of the causes and condition of human and animal well - being .
In fact , the endurance of religion as a lens through which most people view moral questions has separated most moral talk from real questions of human and animal suffering .
This is why we spend our time talking about things like gay marriage and not about genocide or nuclear proliferation or poverty or any other hugely consequential issue .
But the demagogues are right about one thing : We need a universal conception of human values .
Now , what stands in the way of this ?
Well , one thing to notice is that we do something different when talking about morality  -  -  especially secular , academic , scientist types .
When talking about morality we value differences of opinion in a way that we dont in any other area of our lives .
So , for instance the Dalai Lama gets up every morning meditating on compassion , and he thinks that helping other human beings is an integral component of human happiness .
On the other hand , we have someone like Ted Bundy ; Ted Bundy was very fond of abducting and raping and torturing and killing young women .
So , we appear to have a genuine difference of opinion about how to profitably use ones time .
Most Western intellectuals look at this situation and say ,  Well , theres nothing for the Dalai Lama or for Ted Bundy to be really wrong about that admits of a real argument that potentially falls within the purview of science .
He likes chocolate , he likes vanilla .
Theres nothing that one should be able to say to the other that should persuade the other . 
Notice that we dont do this in science .
On the left you have Edward Witten .
Hes a string theorist .
If you ask the smartest physicists around who is the smartest physicist around , in my experience half of them will say Ed Witten .
The other half will tell you they dont like the question .
So , what would happen if I showed up at a physics conference and said ,  String theory is bogus .
It doesnt resonate with me . Its not how I chose to view the universe at a small scale .
Im not a fan . 
Well , nothing would happen because Im not a physicist ; I dont understand string theory .
Im the Ted Bundy of string theory .
I wouldnt want to belong to any string theory club that would have me as a member .
But this is just the point .
Whenever we are talking about facts certain opinions must be excluded .
That is what it is to have a domain of expertise .
That is what it is for knowledge to count .
How have we convinced ourselves that in the moral sphere there is no such thing as moral expertise , or moral talent , or moral genius even ?
How have we convinced ourselves that every opinion has to count ?
How have we convinced ourselves that every culture has a point of view on these subjects worth considering ?
Does the Taliban have a point of view on physics that is worth considering ? No .
How is their ignorance any less obvious on the subject of human well - being ?
So , this , I think , is what the world needs now .
It needs people like ourselves to admit that there are right and wrong answers to questions of human flourishing , and morality relates to that domain of facts .
It is possible for individuals , and even for whole cultures , to care about the wrong things , which is to say that its possible for them to have beliefs and desires that reliably lead to needless human suffering .
Just admitting this will transform our discourse about morality .
We live in a world in which the boundaries between nations mean less and less , and they will one day mean nothing .
We live in a world filled with destructive technology , and this technology can not be uninvented ; it will always be easier to break things than to fix them .
It seems to me , therefore , patently obvious that we can no more respect and tolerate vast differences in notions of human well - being than we can respect or tolerate vast differences in the notions about how disease spreads , or in the safety standards of buildings and airplanes .
We simply must converge on the answers we give to the most important questions in human life .
And to do that , we have to admit that these questions have answers .
Thank you very much .
So , some combustible material there .
Whether in this audience or people elsewhere in the world , hearing some of this , may well be doing the screaming - with - rage thing , after as well , some of them .
Language seems to be really important here .
When youre talking about the veil , youre talking about women dressed in cloth bags .
Ive lived in the Muslim world , spoken with a lot of Muslim women .
And some of them would say something else . They would say ,  No , you know , this is a celebration of female specialness , it helps build that and its a result of the fact that   -  -  and this is arguably a sophisticated psychological view  -  -   that male lust is not to be trusted . 
I mean , can you engage in a conversation with that kind of woman without seeming kind of cultural imperialist ?
Sam Harris : Yeah , well I think I tried to broach this in a sentence , watching the clock ticking , but the question is : What is voluntary in a context where men have certain expectations , and youre guaranteed to be treated in a certain way if you dont veil yourself ?
And so , if anyone in this room wanted to wear a veil , or a very funny hat , or tattoo their face  -  -  I think we should be free to voluntarily do whatever we want , but we have to be honest about the constraints that these women are placed under .
And so I think we shouldnt be so eager to always take their word for it , especially when its 120 degrees out and youre wearing a full burqa .
A lot of people want to believe in this concept of moral progress .
But can you reconcile that ?
I think I understood you to say that you could reconcile that with a world that doesnt become one dimensional , where we all have to think the same .
Paint your picture of what rolling the clock 50 years forward , 100 years forward , how you would like to think of the world , balancing moral progress with richness .
SH : Well , I think once you admit that we are on the path toward understanding our minds at the level of the brain in some important detail , then you have to admit that we are going to understand all of the positive and negative qualities of ourselves in much greater detail .
So , were going to understand positive social emotion like empathy and compassion , and were going to understand the factors that encourage it  -  -  whether theyre genetic , whether theyre how people talk to one another , whether theyre economic systems , and insofar as we begin to shine light on that we are inevitably going to converge on that fact space .
So , everything is not going to be up for grabs .
Its not going to be like veiling my daughter from birth is just as good as teaching her to be confident and well - educated in the context of men who do desire women .
I mean I dont think we need an NSF grant to know that compulsory veiling is a bad idea  -  -  but at a certain point were going to be able to scan the brains of everyone involved and actually interrogate them .
Do people love their daughters just as much in these systems ?
And I think there are clearly right answers to that .
And if the results come out that actually they do , are you prepared to shift your instinctive current judgment on some of these issues ?
SH : Well yeah , modulo one obvious fact , that you can love someone in the context of a truly delusional belief system .
So , you can say like ,  Because I knew my gay son was going to go to hell if he found a boyfriend , I chopped his head off . And that was the most compassionate thing I could do . 
If you get all those parts aligned , yes I think you could probably be feeling the emotion of love .
But again , then we have to talk about well - being in a larger context .
Its all of us in this together , not one man feeling ecstasy and then blowing himself up on a bus .
Sam , this is a conversation I would actually love to continue for hours .
We dont have that , but maybe another time . Thank you for coming to TED .
SH : Really an honor . Thank you .
Kathryn Schulz : On being wrong
Most of us will do anything to avoid being wrong . But what if were wrong about that ?  Wrongologist  Kathryn Schulz makes a compelling case for not just admitting but embracing our fallibility .
So its 1995 , Im in college , and a friend and I go on a road trip from Providence , Rhode Island to Portland , Oregon .
And you know , were young and unemployed , so we do the whole thing on back roads through state parks and national forests  -  -  basically the longest route we can possibly take .
And somewhere in the middle of South Dakota , I turn to my friend and I ask her a question thats been bothering me for 2,000 miles .
 Whats up with the Chinese character I keep seeing by the side of the road ? 
My friend looks at me totally blankly .
Theres actually a gentleman in the front row whos doing a perfect imitation of her look .
And Im like ,  You know , all the signs we keep seeing with the Chinese character on them . 
She just stares at me for a few moments , and then she cracks up , because she figures out what Im talking about .
And what Im talking about is this .
Right , the famous Chinese character for picnic area .
Ive spent the last five years of my life thinking about situations exactly like this  -  -  why we sometimes misunderstand the signs around us , and how we behave when that happens , and what all of this can tell us about human nature .
In other words , as you heard Chris say , Ive spent the last five years thinking about being wrong .
This might strike you as a strange career move , but it actually has one great advantage : no job competition .
In fact , most of us do everything we can to avoid thinking about being wrong , or at least to avoid thinking about the possibility that we ourselves are wrong .
We get it in the abstract .
We all know everybody in this room makes mistakes .
The human species , in general , is fallible  -  -  okay fine .
But when it comes down to me , right now , to all the beliefs I hold , here in the present tense , suddenly all of this abstract appreciation of fallibility goes out the window  -  -  and I cant actually think of anything Im wrong about .
And the thing is , the present tense is where we live .
We go to meetings in the present tense ; we go on family vacations in the present tense ; we go to the polls and vote in the present tense .
So effectively , we all kind of wind up traveling through life , trapped in this little bubble of feeling very right about everything .
I think this is a problem .
I think its a problem for each of us as individuals , in our personal and professional lives , and I think its a problem for all of us collectively as a culture .
So what I want to do today is , first of all , talk about why we get stuck inside this feeling of being right .
And second , why its such a problem .
And finally , I want to convince you that it is possible to step outside of that feeling and that if you can do so , it is the single greatest moral , intellectual and creative leap you can make .
So why do we get stuck in this feeling of being right ?
One reason , actually , has to do with a feeling of being wrong .
So let me ask you guys something  -  -  or actually , let me ask you guys something , because youre right here : How does it feel  -  -  emotionally  -  -  how does it feel to be wrong ?
Dreadful . Thumbs down .
Embarrassing . Okay , wonderful , great .
Dreadful , thumbs down , embarrassing  -  -  thank you , these are great answers , but theyre answers to a different question .
You guys are answering the question : How does it feel to realize youre wrong ?
Realizing youre wrong can feel like all of that and a lot of other things , right ?
I mean it can be devastating , it can be revelatory , it can actually be quite funny , like my stupid Chinese character mistake .
But just being wrong doesnt feel like anything .
Ill give you an analogy .
Do you remember that Loony Tunes cartoon where theres this pathetic coyote whos always chasing and never catching a roadrunner ?
In pretty much every episode of this cartoon , theres a moment where the coyote is chasing the roadrunner and the roadrunner runs off a cliff , which is fine  -  -  hes a bird , he can fly .
But the thing is , the coyote runs off the cliff right after him .
And whats funny  -  -  at least if youre six years old  -  -  is that the coyotes totally fine too .
He just keeps running  -  -  right up until the moment that he looks down and realizes that hes in mid - air .
Thats when he falls .
When were wrong about something  -  -  not when we realize it , but before that  -  -  were like that coyote after hes gone off the cliff and before he looks down .
You know , were already wrong , were already in trouble , but we feel like were on solid ground .
So I should actually correct something I said a moment ago .
It does feel like something to be wrong ; it feels like being right .
So this is one reason , a structural reason , why we get stuck inside this feeling of rightness .
I call this error blindness .
Most of the time , we dont have any kind of internal cue to let us know that were wrong about something , until its too late .
But theres a second reason that we get stuck inside this feeling as well  -  -  and this one is cultural .
Think back for a moment to elementary school .
Youre sitting there in class , and your teacher is handing back quiz papers , and one of them looks like this .
This is not mine , by the way .
So there you are in grade school , and you know exactly what to think about the kid who got this paper .
Its the dumb kid , the troublemaker , the one who never does his homework .
So by the time you are nine years old , youve already learned , first of all , that people who get stuff wrong are lazy , irresponsible dimwits  -  -  and second of all , that the way to succeed in life is to never make any mistakes .
We learn these really bad lessons really well .
And a lot of us  -  -  and I suspect , especially a lot of us in this room  -  -  deal with them by just becoming perfect little A students , perfectionists , over - achievers .
Right , Mr. CFO , astrophysicist , ultra - marathoner ?
Youre all CFO , astrophysicists , ultra - marathoners , it turns out .
Okay , so fine .
Except that then we freak out at the possibility that weve gotten something wrong .
Because according to this , getting something wrong means theres something wrong with us .
So we just insist that were right , because it makes us feel smart and responsible and virtuous and safe .
So let me tell you a story .
A couple of years ago , a woman comes into Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center for a surgery .
Beth Israels in Boston .
Its the teaching hospital for Harvard  -  -  one of the best hospitals in the country .
So this woman comes in and shes taken into the operating room .
Shes anesthetized , the surgeon does his thing  -  -  stitches her back up , sends her out to the recovery room .
Everything seems to have gone fine .
And she wakes up , and she looks down at herself , and she says ,  Why is the wrong side of my body in bandages ? 
Well the wrong side of her body is in bandages because the surgeon has performed a major operation on her left leg instead of her right one .
When the vice president for health care quality at Beth Israel spoke about this incident , he said something very interesting .
He said ,  For whatever reason , the surgeon simply felt that he was on the correct side of the patient . 
The point of this story is that trusting too much in the feeling of being on the correct side of anything can be very dangerous .
This internal sense of rightness that we all experience so often is not a reliable guide to what is actually going on in the external world .
And when we act like it is , and we stop entertaining the possibility that we could be wrong , well thats when we end up doing things like dumping 200 million gallons of oil into the Gulf of Mexico , or torpedoing the global economy .
So this is a huge practical problem .
But its also a huge social problem .
Think for a moment about what it means to feel right .
It means that you think that your beliefs just perfectly reflect reality .
And when you feel that way , youve got a problem to solve , which is , how are you going to explain all of those people who disagree with you ?
It turns out , most of us explain those people the same way , by resorting to a series of unfortunate assumptions .
The first thing we usually do when someone disagrees with us is we just assume theyre ignorant .
They dont have access to the same information that we do , and when we generously share that information with them , theyre going to see the light and come on over to our team .
When that doesnt work , when it turns out those people have all the same facts that we do and they still disagree with us , then we move on to a second assumption , which is that theyre idiots .
They have all the right pieces of the puzzle , and they are too moronic to put them together correctly .
And when that doesnt work , when it turns out that people who disagree with us have all the same facts we do and are actually pretty smart , then we move on to a third assumption : they know the truth , and they are deliberately distorting it for their own malevolent purposes .
So this is a catastrophe .
This attachment to our own rightness keeps us from preventing mistakes when we absolutely need to and causes us to treat each other terribly .
But to me , whats most baffling and most tragic about this is that it misses the whole point of being human .
Its like we want to imagine that our minds are just these perfectly translucent windows and we just gaze out of them and describe the world as it unfolds .
And we want everybody else to gaze out of the same window and see the exact same thing .
That is not true , and if it were , life would be incredibly boring .
The miracle of your mind isnt that you can see the world as it is .
Its that you can see the world as it isnt .
We can remember the past , and we can think about the future , and we can imagine what its like to be some other person in some other place .
And we all do this a little differently , which is why we can all look up at the same night sky and see this and also this and also this .
And yeah , it is also why we get things wrong .
1,200 years before Descartes said his famous thing about  I think therefore I am ,  this guy , St . Augustine , sat down and wrote  Fallor ergo sum   -  -   I err therefore I am . 
Augustine understood that our capacity to screw up , its not some kind of embarrassing defect in the human system , something we can eradicate or overcome .
Its totally fundamental to who we are .
Because , unlike God , we dont really know whats going on out there .
And unlike all of the other animals , we are obsessed with trying to figure it out .
To me , this obsession is the source and root of all of our productivity and creativity .
Last year , for various reasons , I found myself listening to a lot of episodes of the Public Radio show This American Life .
And so Im listening and Im listening , and at some point , I start feeling like all the stories are about being wrong .
And my first thought was ,  Ive lost it .
Ive become the crazy wrongness lady .
I just imagined it everywhere ,  which has happened .
But a couple of months later , I actually had a chance to interview Ira Glass , whos the host of the show .
And I mentioned this to him , and he was like ,  No actually , thats true .
In fact ,  he says ,  as a staff , we joke that every single episode of our show has the same crypto - theme .
And the crypto - theme is : I thought this one thing was going to happen and something else happened instead . And the thing is ,  says Ira Glass ,  we need this .
We need these moments of surprise and reversal and wrongness to make these stories work . 
And for the rest of us , audience members , as listeners , as readers , we eat this stuff up .
We love things like plot twists and red herrings and surprise endings .
When it comes to our stories , we love being wrong .
But , you know , our stories are like this because our lives are like this .
We think this one thing is going to happen and something else happens instead .
George Bush thought he was going to invade Iraq , find a bunch of weapons of mass destruction , liberate the people and bring democracy to the Middle East .
And something else happened instead .
And Hosni Mubarak thought he was going to be the dictator of Egypt for the rest of his life , until he got too old or too sick and could pass the reigns of power onto his son .
And something else happened instead .
And maybe you thought you were going to grow up and marry your high school sweetheart and move back to your hometown and raise a bunch of kids together .
And something else happened instead .
And I have to tell you that I thought I was writing an incredibly nerdy book about a subject everybody hates for an audience that would never materialize .
And something else happened instead .
I mean , this is life .
For good and for ill , we generate these incredible stories about the world around us , and then the world turns around and astonishes us .
No offense , but this entire conference is an unbelievable monument to our capacity to get stuff wrong .
We just spent an entire week talking about innovations and advancements and improvements , but you know why we need all of those innovations and advancements and improvements ?
Because half the stuff thats the most mind - boggling and world - altering  -  -  TED 1998  -  -  eh .
Didnt really work out that way , did it ?
Wheres my jet pack , Chris ?
So here we are again .
And thats how it goes .
We come up with another idea .
We tell another story .
We hold another conference .
The theme of this one , as you guys have now heard seven million times , is the rediscovery of wonder .
And to me , if you really want to rediscover wonder , you need to step outside of that tiny , terrified space of rightness and look around at each other and look out at the vastness and complexity and mystery of the universe and be able to say ,  Wow , I dont know .
Maybe Im wrong . 
Thank you .
Thank you guys .
Neil MacGregor : 2600 years of history in one object
A clay cylinder covered in Akkadian cuneiform script , damaged and broken , the Cyrus Cylinder is a powerful symbol of religious tolerance and multi - culturalism . In this enthralling talk Neil MacGregor , Director of the British Museum , traces 2600 years of Middle Eastern history through this single object .
The things we make have one supreme quality  -  -  they live longer than us .
We perish , they survive ; we have one life , they have many lives , and in each life they can mean different things .
Which means that , while we all have one biography , they have many .
I want this morning to talk about the story , the biography  -  -  or rather the biographies  -  -  of one particular object , one remarkable thing .
It doesnt , I agree , look very much .
Its about the size of a rugby ball .
Its made of clay , and its been fashioned into a cylinder shape , covered with close writing and then baked dry in the sun .
And as you can see , its been knocked about a bit , which is not surprising because it was made two and a half thousand years ago and was dug up in 1879 .
But today , this thing is , I believe , a major player in the politics of the Middle East .
And its an object with fascinating stories and stories that are by no means over yet .
The story begins in the Iran - Iraq war and that series of events that culminated in the invasion of Iraq by foreign forces , the removal of a despotic ruler and instant regime change .
And I want to begin with one episode from that sequence of events that most of you would be very familiar with , Belshazzars feast  -  -  because were talking about the Iran - Iraq war of 539 BC .
And the parallels between the events of 539 BC and 2003 and in between are startling .
What youre looking at is Rembrandts painting , now in the National Gallery in London , illustrating the text from the prophet Daniel in the Hebrew scriptures .
And you all know roughly the story .
Belshazzar , the son of Nebuchadnezzar , Nebuchadnezzar whod conquered Israel , sacked Jerusalem and captured the people and taken the Jews back to Babylon .
Not only the Jews , hed taken the temple vessels .
Hed ransacked , desecrated the temple .
And the great gold vessels of the temple in Jerusalem had been taken to Babylon .
Belshazzar , his son , decides to have a feast .
And in order to make it even more exciting , he added a bit of sacrilege to the rest of the fun , and he brings out the temple vessels .
Hes already at war with the Iranians , with the king of Persia .
And that night , Daniel tells us , at the height of the festivities a hand appeared and wrote on the wall ,  You are weighed in the balance and found wanting , and your kingdom is handed over to the Medes and the Persians . 
And that very night Cyrus , king of the Persians , entered Babylon and the whole regime of Belshazzar fell .
It is , of course , a great moment in the history of the Jewish people .
Its a great story . Its story we all know .
 The writing on the wall  is part of our everyday language .
What happened next was remarkable , and its where our cylinder enters the story .
Cyrus , king of the Persians , has entered Babylon without a fight  -  -  the great empire of Babylon , which ran from central southern Iraq to the Mediterranean , falls to Cyrus .
And Cyrus makes a declaration .
And that is what this cylinder is , the declaration made by the ruler guided by God who had toppled the Iraqi despot and was going to bring freedom to the people .
In ringing Babylonian  -  -  it was written in Babylonian  -  -  he says ,  I am Cyrus , king of all the universe , the great king , the powerful king , king of Babylon , king of the four quarters of the world . 
Theyre not shy of hyperbole as you can see .
This is probably the first real press release by a victorious army that weve got .
And its written , as well see in due course , by very skilled P.R. consultants .
So the hyperbole is not actually surprising .
And what is the great king , the powerful king , the king of the four quarters of the world going to do ?
He goes on to say that , having conquered Babylon , he will at once let all the peoples that the Babylonians  -  -  Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar  -  -  have captured and enslaved go free .
Hell let them return to their countries .
And more important , he will let them all recover the gods , the statues , the temple vessels that had been confiscated .
All the peoples that the Babylonians had repressed and removed will go home , and theyll take with them their gods .
And theyll be able to restore their altars and to worship their gods in their own way , in their own place .
This is the decree , this object is the evidence for the fact that the Jews , after the exile in Babylon , the years theyd spent sitting by the waters of Babylon , weeping when they remembered Jerusalem , those Jews were allowed to go home .
They were allowed to return to Jerusalem and to rebuild the temple .
Its a central document in Jewish history .
And the Book of Chronicles , the Book of Ezra in the Hebrew scriptures reported in ringing terms .
This is the Jewish version of the same story .
 Thus said Cyrus , king of Persia , All the kingdoms of the earth have the Lord God of heaven given thee , and he has charged me to build him a house in Jerusalem .
Who is there among you of his people ?
The Lord God be with him , and let him go up .   Go up   -  -  aaleh .
The central element , still , of the notion of return , a central part of the life of Judaism .
As you all know , that return from exile , the second temple , reshaped Judaism .
And that change , that great historic moment , was made possible by Cyrus , the king of Persia , reported for us in Hebrew in scripture and in Babylonian in clay .
Two great texts , what about the politics ?
What was going on was the fundamental shift in Middle Eastern history .
The empire of Iran , the Medes and the Persians , united under Cyrus , became the first great world empire .
Cyrus begins in the 530s BC .
And by the time of his son Darius , the whole of the eastern Mediterranean is under Persian control .
This empire is , in fact , the Middle East as we now know it , and its what shapes the Middle East as we now know it .
It was the largest empire the world had known until then .
Much more important , it was the first multicultural , multifaith state on a huge scale .
And it had to be run in a quite new way .
It had to be run in different languages .
The fact that this decree is in Babylonian says one thing .
And it had to recognize their different habits , different peoples , different religions , different faiths .
All of those are respected by Cyrus .
Cyrus sets up a model of how you run a great multinational , multifaith , multicultural society .
And the result of that was an empire that included the areas you see on the screen , and which survived for 200 years of stability until it was shattered by Alexander .
It left a dream of the Middle East as a unit , and a unit where people of different faiths could live together .
The Greek invasions ended that .
And of course , Alexander couldnt sustain a government and it fragmented .
But what Cyrus represented remained absolutely central .
The Greek historian Xenophon wrote his book  Cyropaedia  promoting Cyrus as the great ruler .
And throughout European culture afterward , Cyrus remained the model .
This is a 16th century image to show you how widespread his veneration actually was .
And Xenophons book on Cyrus on how you ran a diverse society was one of the great textbooks that inspired the Founding Fathers of the American Revolution .
Jefferson was a great admirer  -  -  the ideals of Cyrus obviously speaking to those 18th century ideals of how you create religious tolerance in a new state .
Meanwhile , back in Babylon , things had not been going well .
After Alexander , the other empires , Babylon declines , falls into ruins , and all the traces of the great Babylonian empire are lost  -  -  until 1879 when the cylinder is discovered by a British Museum exhibition digging in Babylon .
And it enters now another story .
It enters that great debate in the middle of the 19th century : Are the scriptures reliable ? Can we trust them ?
We only knew about the return of the Jews and the decree of Cyrus from the Hebrew scriptures .
No other evidence .
Suddenly , this appeared .
And great excitement to a world where those who believed in the scriptures had had their faith in creation shaken by evolution , by geology , here was evidence that the scriptures were historically true .
Its a great 19th century moment .
But  -  -  and this , of course , is where it becomes complicated  -  -  the facts were true , hurrah for archeology , but the interpretation was rather more complicated .
Because the cylinder account and the Hebrew Bible account differ in one key respect .
The Babylonian cylinder is written by the priests of the great god of Bablyon , Marduk .
And , not surprisingly , they tell you that all this was done by Marduk .
 Marduk , we hold , called Cyrus by his name . 
Marduk takes Cyrus by the hand , calls him to shepherd his people and gives him the rule of Babylon .
Marduk tells Cyrus that he will do these great , generous things of setting the people free .
And this is why we should all be grateful to and worship Marduk .
The Hebrew writers in the Old Testament , you will not be surprised to learn , take a rather different view of this .
For them , of course , it cant possibly by Marduk that made all this happen .
It can only be Jehovah .
And so in Isaiah , we have the wonderful texts giving all the credit of this , not to Marduk but to the Lord God of Israel  -  -  the Lord God of Israel who also called Cyrus by name , also takes Cyrus by the hand and talks of him shepherding his people .
Its a remarkable example of two different priestly appropriations of the same event , two different religious takeovers of a political fact .
God , we know , is usually on the side of the big battalions .
The question is , which god was it ?
And the debate unsettles everybody in the 19th century to realize that the Hebrew scriptures are part of a much wider world of religion .
And its quite clear the cylinder is older than the text of Isaiah , and yet , Jehovah is speaking in words very similar to those used by Marduk .
And theres a slight sense that Isaiah knows this , because he says , this is God speaking , of course ,  I have called thee by thy name though thou hast not known me . 
I think its recognized that Cyrus doesnt realize that hes acting under orders from Jehovah .
And equally , hed have been surprised that he was acting under orders from Marduk .
Because interestingly , of course , Cyrus is a good Iranian with a totally different set of gods who are not mentioned in any of these texts .
Thats 1879 .
40 years on and were in 1917 , and the cylinder enters a different world .
This time , the real politics of the contemporary world  -  -  the year of the Balfour Declaration , the year when the new imperial power in the Middle East , Britain , decides that it will declare a Jewish national home , it will allow the Jews to return .
And the response to this by the Jewish population in Eastern Europe is rhapsodic .
And across Eastern Europe , Jews display pictures of Cyrus and of George V side by side  -  -  the two great rulers who have allowed the return to Jerusalem .
And the Cyrus cylinder comes back into public view and the text of this as a demonstration of why what is going to happen after the war is over in 1918 is part of a divine plan .
You all know what happened .
The state of Israel is setup , and 50 years later , in the late 60s , its clear that Britains role as the imperial power is over .
And another story of the cylinder begins .
The region , the U.K . and the U.S . decide , has to be kept safe from communism , and the superpower that will be created to do this would be Iran , the Shah .
And so the Shah invents an Iranian history , or a return to Iranian history , that puts him in the center of a great tradition and produces coins showing himself with the Cyrus cylinder .
When he has his great celebrations in Persepolis , he summons the cylinder and the cylinder is lent by the British Museum , goes to Tehran , and is part of those great celebrations of the Pahlavi dynasty .
Cyrus cylinder : guarantor of the Shah .
10 years later , another story : Iranian Revolution , 1979 .
Islamic revolution , no more Cyrus ; were not interested in that history , were interested in Islamic Iran  -  -  until Iraq , the new superpower that weve all decided should be in the region , attacks .
Then another Iran - Iraq war .
And it becomes critical for the Iranians to remember their great past , their great past when they fought Iraq and won .
It becomes critical to find a symbol that will pull together all Iranians  -  -  Muslims and non - Muslims , Christians , Zoroastrians , Jews living in Iran , people who are devout , not devout .
And the obvious emblem is Cyrus .
So when the British Museum and Tehran National Musuem cooperate and work together , as weve been doing , the Iranians ask for one thing only as a loan .
Its the only object they want .
They want to borrow the Cyrus cylinder .
And last year , the Cyrus cylinder went to Tehran for the second time .
Its shown being presented here , put into its case by the director of the National Museum of Tehran , one of the many women in Iran in very senior positions , Mrs. Ardakani .
It was a huge event .
This is the other side of that same picture .
Its seen in Tehran by between one and two million people in the space of a few months .
This is beyond any blockbuster exhibition in the West .
And its the subject of a huge debate about what this cylinder means , what Cyrus means , but above all , Cyrus as articulated through this cylinder  -  -  Cyrus as the defender of the homeland , the champion , of course , of Iranian identity and of the Iranian peoples , tolerant of all faiths .
And in the current Iran , Zoroastrians and Christians have guaranteed places in the Iranian parliament , something to be very , very proud of .
To see this object in Tehran , thousands of Jews living in Iran came to Tehran to see it .
It became a great emblem , a great subject of debate about what Iran is at home and abroad .
Is Iran still to be the defender of the oppressed ?
Will Iran set free the people that the tyrants have enslaved and expropriated ?
This is heady national rhetoric , and it was all put together in a great pageant launching the return .
Here you see this out - sized Cyrus cylinder on the stage with great figures from Iranian history gathering to take their place in the heritage of Iran .
It was a narrative presented by the president himself .
And for me , to take this object to Iran , to be allowed to take this object to Iran was to be allowed to be part of an extraordinary debate led at the highest levels about what Iran is , what different Irans there are and how the different histories of Iran might shape the world today .
Its a debate thats still continuing , and it will continue to rumble , because this object is one of the great declarations of a human aspiration .
It stands with the American constitution .
It certainly says far more about real freedoms than Magna Carta .
It is a document that can mean so many things , for Iran and for the region .
A replica of this is at the United Nations .
In New York this autumn , it will be present when the great debates about the future of the Middle East take place .
And I want to finish by asking you what the next story will be in which this object figures .
It will appear , certainly , in many more Middle Eastern stories .
And what story of the Middle East , what story of the world , do you want to see reflecting what is said , what is expressed in this cylinder ?
The right of peoples to live together in the same state , worshiping differently , freely  -  -  a Middle East , a world , in which religion is not the subject of division or of debate .
In the world of the Middle East at the moment , the debates are , as you know , shrill .
But I think its possible that the most powerful and the wisest voice of all of them may well be the voice of this mute thing , the Cyrus cylinder .
Thank you .
Joshua Klein : A thought experiment on the intelligence of crows
Hacker and writer Joshua Klein is fascinated by crows . After a long amateur study of corvid behavior , hes come up with an elegant thought experiment : a machine that could form a new bond between animal and human .
How many of you have seen the Alfred Hitchcock film  The Birds  ?
Any of you get really freaked out by that ?
You might want to leave now .
So , this is a vending machine for crows .
And over the past few days , many of you have been asking me ,  How did you come to this ? How did you get started doing this ? 
And it started , as with many great ideas , or many ideas you cant get rid of anyway , at a cocktail party .
About 10 years ago , I was at a cocktail party with a friend of mine , and were sitting there , and he was complaining about the crows that he had seen that were all over his yard and making a big mess .
And he was telling me that really , we ought to try and eradicate these things .
We gotta kill them because theyre making a mess .
I said that was stupid , you know , maybe we should just train them to do something useful .
And he said that was impossible .
And Im sure Im in good company in finding that tremendously annoying  -  -  when someone tells you its impossible .
So , I spent the next 10 years reading about crows in my spare time .
And after 10 years of this , my wife eventually said ,  Look , you know , you gotta do this thing youve been talking about , and build the vending machine . 
So I did .
But part of the reason that I found this interesting is that I started noticing that we are very aware of all the species that are going extinct on the planet as a result of human habitation expansion , and no one seems to be paying attention to all the species that are actually living  -  -  that are surviving .
And Im talking specifically about synanthropic species , which are species that have adapted specifically for human ecologies , species like rats and cockroaches and crows .
And as I started looking at them , I was finding that they had hyper - adapted .
Theyd become extremely adept at living with us .
And in return , we just tried to kill them all the time .
And in doing so , we were breeding them for parasitism .
We were giving them all sorts of reasons to adapt new ways .
So , for example , rats are incredibly responsive breeders .
And cockroaches , as anyone whos tried to get rid of them knows , have become really immune to the poisons that were using .
So , I thought , lets build something thats mutually beneficial .
Well , then lets build something that we can both benefit from , and find some way to make a new relationship with these species .
And so I built the vending machine .
But the story of the vending machine is a little more interesting if you know more about crows .
It turns out that crows arent just surviving with human beings  -  -  theyre actually really thriving .
Theyre found everywhere on the planet except for the Arctic and the southern tip of South America .
And in all that area , theyre only rarely found breeding more than five kilometers away from human beings .
So we may not think about them , but theyre always around .
And not surprisingly , given the human population growth , more than half of the human population is living in cities now .
And out of those , nine - tenths of the human growth population is occurring in cities .
Were seeing a population boom with crows .
So bird counts are indicating that we might be seeing up to exponential growth in their numbers .
So thats no great surprise .
But what was really interesting to me was to find out that the birds were adapting in a pretty unusual way .
And Ill give you an example of that .
So this is Betty . Shes a New Caledonian crow .
And these crows use sticks in the wild to get insects and whatnot out of pieces of wood .
Here , shes trying to get a piece of meat out of a tube .
But the researchers had a problem .
They messed up and left just a stick of wire in there .
And she hadnt had the opportunity to do this before .
You see , it wasnt working very well .
So she adapted .
Now this is completely unprompted . She had never seen this done before .
No one taught her to bend this into a hook , had shown her how it could happen .
But she did it all on her own .
So keep in mind that shes never seen this done .
Right .
Yeah . All right .
Thats the part where the researchers freak out .
So , it turns out weve been finding more and more that crows are really , really intelligent .
Their brains are proportionate , in the same proportion as chimpanzee brains are .
There are all kinds of anecdotes for different kinds of intelligence they have .
For example , in Sweden , crows will wait for fishermen to drop lines through holes in the ice .
And when the fishermen move off , the crows fly down , reel up the lines , and eat the fish or the bait .
Its pretty annoying for the fishermen .
On an entirely different tack , at University of Washington , they , a few years ago , were doing an experiment where they captured some crows on campus .
Some students went out and netted some crows , brought them in , and were  -  -  weighed them , and measured them and whatnot , and then let them back out again .
And were entertained to discover that for the rest of the week , these crows , whenever these particular students walked around campus , these crows would caw at them , and run around and make their life kind of miserable .
They were significantly less entertained when this went on for the next week .
And the next month . And after summer break .
Until they finally graduated and left campus , and  -  -  glad to get away , Im sure  -  -  came back sometime later , and found the crows still remembered them .
So  -  -  the moral being , dont piss off crows .
So now , students at the University of Washington that are studying these crows do so with a giant wig and a big mask .
Its fairly interesting .
So we know that these crows are really smart , but the more I dug into this , the more I found that they actually have an even more significant adaptation .
Crows have become highly skilled at making a living in these new urban environments .
In this Japanese city , they have devised a way of eating a food that normally they cant manage : drop it among the traffic .
The problem now is collecting the bits , without getting run over .
Wait for the light to stop the traffic .
Then , collect your cracked nut in safety .
Joshua Klein : Yeah , yeah . Pretty interesting .
So whats significant about this isnt that crows are using cars to crack nuts .
In fact , thats old hat for crows .
This happened about 10 years ago in a place called Sendai City , at a driving school in the suburbs of Tokyo .
And since that time , all of the crows in the neighborhood are picking up this behavior .
And now , every crow within five kilometers is standing by a sidewalk , waiting to collect its lunch .
So , theyre learning from each other . And research bears this out .
Parents seem to be teaching their young .
Theyve learned from their peers . Theyve learned from their enemies .
If I have a little extra time , Ill tell you about a case of crow infidelity that illustrates that nicely .
The point being that theyve developed cultural adaptation .
And as we heard yesterday , thats the Pandoras box thats getting human beings in trouble , and were starting to see it with them .
Theyre able to very quickly and very flexibly adapt to new challenges and new resources in their environment , which is really useful if you live in a city .
So we know that theres lots of crows .
We found out theyre really smart , and we found out that they can teach each other .
And when all this became clear to me , I realized the only obvious thing to do is build a vending machine .
So thats what we did .
This is a vending machine for crows .
And it uses Skinnerian training to shape their behavior over four stages .
Its pretty simple .
Basically , what happens is that we put this out in a field , or someplace where theres lots of crows , and we put coins and peanuts all around the base of the machine .
And crows eventually come by , and eat the peanuts and get used to the machine being there .
And eventually , they eat up all the peanuts .
And then they see that there are peanuts here on the feeder tray , and they hop up and help themselves .
And then they leave , and the machine spits up more coins and peanuts , and life is really dandy , if youre a crow .
Then you can come back anytime and get yourself a peanut .
So , when they get really used to that , we move on to the crows coming back .
Now , theyre used to the sound of the machine , and they keep coming back , and digging out these peanuts from amongst the pile of coins thats there .
And when they get really happy about this , we go ahead and stymie them .
And we move to the third stage , where we only give them a coin .
Now , like most of us who have gotten used to a good thing , this really pisses them off .
So , they do what they do in nature when theyre looking for something  -  -  they sweep things out of the way with their beak .
And they do that here , and that knocks the coins down the slot , and when that happens , they get a peanut .
And so this goes on for some time .
The crows learn that all they have to do is show up , wait for the coin to come out , put the coin in the slot , and then they get their peanut .
And when theyre really good and comfortable with that , we move to the final stage , in which they show up and nothing happens .
And this is where we see the difference between crows and other animals .
Squirrels , for example , would show up , look for the peanut , go away .
Come back , look for the peanut , go away .
They do this maybe half a dozen times before they get bored , and then they go off and play in traffic .
Crows , on the other hand , show up , and they try and figure it out .
They know that this machines been messing with them , through three different stages of behavior .
They figure its gotta have more to it .
So , they poke at it and peck at it and whatnot .
And eventually some crow gets a bright idea that ,  Hey , theres lots of coins lying around from the first stage , lying around on the ground ,  hops down , picks it up , drops it in the slot .
And then , were off to the races .
That crow enjoys a temporary monopoly on peanuts , until his friends figure out how to do it , and then there we go .
So , whats significant about this to me isnt that we can train crows to pick up peanuts .
Mind you , theres 216 million dollars worth of change lost every year , but Im not sure I can depend on that ROI from crows .
Instead , I think we should look a little bit larger .
I think that crows can be trained to do other things .
For example , why not train them to pick up garbage after stadium events ?
Or find expensive components from discarded electronics ?
Or maybe do search and rescue ?
The main thing , the main point of all this for me is that we can find mutually beneficial systems for these species .
We can find ways to interact with these other species that doesnt involve exterminating them , but involves finding an equilibrium with them thats a useful balance .
Thanks very much .
David Logan : Tribal leadership
David Logan talks about the five kinds of tribes that humans naturally form  -  -  in schools , workplaces , even the drivers license bureau . By understanding our shared tribal tendencies , we can help lead each other to become better individuals .
What were really here to talk about is the  how . 
Okay , so how exactly do we create this world - shattering , if you will , innovation ?
Now , I want to tell you a quick story .
Well go back a little more than a year .
In fact , the date  -  -  Im curious to know if any of you know what happened on this momentous date ?
It was February 3rd , 2008 .
Anyone remember what happened , February 3rd , 2008 ?
Super Bowl . I heard it over here . It was the date of the Super Bowl .
And the reason that this date was so momentous is that what my colleagues , John King and Halee Fischer - Wright , and I noticed as we began to debrief various Super Bowl parties , is that it seemed to us that across the United States , if you will , tribal councils had convened .
And they had discussed things of great national importance .
Like ,  Do we like the Budweiser commercial ? 
and ,  Do we like the nachos ?  and ,  Who is going to win ? 
But they also talked about which candidate they were going to support .
And if you go back in time to February 3rd , it looked like Hilary Clinton was going to get the Democratic nomination .
And there were even some polls that were saying she was going to go all the way .
But when we talked to people , it appeared that a funnel effect had happened in these tribes all across the United States .
Now what is a tribe ? A tribe is a group of about 20  -  -  so kind of more than a team  -  -  20 to about 150 people .
And its within these tribes that all of our work gets done .
But not just work . Its within these tribes that societies get built , that important things happen .
And so as we surveyed the , if you will , representatives from various tribal councils that met , also known as Super Bowl parties , we sent the following email off to 40 newspaper editors the following day .
February 4th , we posted it on our website . This was before Super Tuesday .
We said ,  The tribes that were in are saying its going to be Obama . 
Now , the reason we knew that was because we spent the previous 10 years studying tribes , studying these naturally occurring groups .
All of you are members of tribes .
In walking around at the break , many of you had met members of your tribe . And you were talking to them .
And many of you were doing what great , if you will , tribal leaders do , which is to find someone who is a member of a tribe , and to find someone else who is another member of a different tribe , and make introductions .
That is in fact what great tribal leaders do .
So here is the bottom line .
If you focus in on a group like this  -  -  this happens to be a USC game  -  -  and you zoom in with one of those super satellite cameras and do magnification factors so you could see individual people , you would in fact see not a single crowd , just like there is not a single crowd here , but you would see these tribes that are then coming together .
And from a distance it appears that its a single group .
And so people form tribes .
They always have . They always will .
Just as fish swim and birds fly , people form tribes . Its just what we do .
But heres the rub .
Not all tribes are the same , and what makes the difference is the culture .
Now here is the net out of this .
Youre all a member of tribes .
If you can find a way to take the tribes that youre in and nudge them forward , along these tribal stages to what we call Stage Five , which is the top of the mountain .
But were going to start with what we call Stage One .
Now , this is the lowest of the stages .
You dont want this . Okay ?
This is a bit of a difficult image to put up on the screen .
But its one that I think we need to learn from .
Stage One produces people who do horrible things .
This is the kid who shot up Virginia Tech .
Stage One is a group where people systematically sever relationships from functional tribes , and then pool together with people who think like they do .
Stage One is literally the culture of gangs and it is the culture of prisons .
Now , again , we dont often deal with Stage One .
And I want to make the point that as members of society , we need to .
Its not enough to simply write people off .
But lets move on to Stage Two .
Now , Stage One , youll notice , says , in effect ,  Life Sucks . 
So , this other book that Steve mentioned , that just came out , called  The Three Laws of Performance ,  my colleague , Steve Zaffron and I , argue that as people see the world , so they behave .
Well , if people see the world in such a way that life sucks , then their behavior will follow automatically from that .
It will be despairing hostility .
Theyll do whatever it takes to survive , even if that means undermining other people .
Now , my birthday is coming up shortly , and my drivers license expires .
And the reason that thats relevant is that very soon I will be walking into what we call a Stage Two tribe , which looks like this .
Now , am I saying that in every Department of Motor Vehicles across the land , you find a Stage Two culture ?
No . But in the one near me , where I have to go in just a few days , what I will say when Im standing in line is ,  How can people be so dumb , and yet live ? 
Now , am I saying that there are dumb people working here ?
Actually , no , Im not .
But Im saying the culture makes people dumb .
So in a Stage Two culture  -  -  and we find these in all sorts of different places  -  -  you find them , in fact , in the best organizations in the world .
You find them in all places in society .
Ive come across them at the organizations that everybody raves about as being best in class .
But here is the point . If you believe and you say to people in your tribe , in effect ,  My life sucks .
I mean , if I got to go to TEDx USC my life wouldnt suck . But I dont . So it does . 
If thats how you talked , imagine what kind of work would get done .
What kind of innovation would get done ?
The amount of world - changing behavior that would happen ?
In fact it would be basically nil .
Now when we go on to Stage Three : this is the one that hits closest to home for many of us .
Because it is in Stage Three that many of us move .
And we park . And we stay .
Stage Three says ,  Im great . And youre not . 
Im great and youre not .
Now imagine having a whole room of people saying , in effect ,  Im great and youre not . 
Or ,  Im going to find some way to compete with you and come out on top as a result of that . 
A whole group of people communicating that way , talking that way .
I know this sounds like a joke . Three doctors walk into a bar .
But , in this case , three doctors walk into an elevator .
I happened to be in the elevator collecting data for this book .
And one doctor said to the others ,  Did you see my article in the New England Journal of Medicine ? 
And the other said ,  No . Thats great . Congratulations ! 
The next one got kind of a wry smile on his face and said ,  Well while you were , you know , doing your research ,   -  -  notice the condescending tone  -  -   While you were off doing your research , I was off doing more surgeries than anyone else in the department of surgery at this institution . 
And the third one got the same wry smile and said ,  Well , while you were off doing your research , and you were off doing your monkey meatball surgery , that eventually well train monkeys to do , or cells or robots , or maybe not even need to do it at all , I was off running the future of the residency program , which is really the future of medicine . 
And they all kind of laughed and they patted him on the back .
And the elevator door opened , and they all walked out .
That is a meeting of a Stage Three tribe .
Now , we find these in places where really smart , successful people show up .
Like , oh , I dont know , TEDx USC .
Here is the greatest challenge we face in innovation .
It is moving from Stage Three to Stage Four .
Lets take a look at a quick video snippet .
This is from a company called Zappos , located outside Las Vegas .
And my question on the other side is just going to be ,  What do you think they value ? 
It was not Christmas time . There was a Christmas tree .
This is their lobby .
Employees volunteer time in the advice booth .
Notice it looks like something out of a Peanuts cartoon .
Okay , were going through the hallway here at Zappos .
This is a call center . Notice how its decorated .
Notice people are applauding for us .
They dont know who we are and they dont care . And if they did they probably wouldnt applaud .
But youll notice the level of excitement .
Notice , again , how they decorate their office .
Now , whats important to people at Zappos , these may not be the things that are important to you .
But they value things like fun . And they value creativity .
One of their stated values is ,  Be a little bit weird . 
And youll notice they are a little bit weird .
So when individuals come together and find something that unites them thats greater than their individual competence , then something very important happens .
The group gels . And it changes from a group of highly motivated but fairly individually - centric people into something larger , into a tribe that becomes aware of its own existence .
Stage Four tribes can do remarkable things .
But youll notice were not at the top of the mountain yet .
There is , in fact , another stage .
Now , some of you may not recognize the scene thats up here .
And if you take a look at the headline of Stage Five , which is  Life is Great ,  this may seem a little incongruous .
This is a scene or snippet from the Truth and Reconciliation process in South Africa for which Desmond Tutu won the Nobel Prize .
Now think about that . South Africa , terrible atrocities had happened in the society .
And people came together focused only on those two values : truth and reconciliation .
There was no road map . No one had ever done anything like this before .
And in this atmosphere , where the only guidance was peoples values and their noble cause , what this group accomplished was historic .
And people , at the time , feared that South Africa would end up going the way that Rwanda has gone , descending into one skirmish after another in a civil war that seems to have no end .
In fact , South Africa has not gone down that road .
Largely because people like Desmond Tutu set up a Stage Five process to involve the thousands and perhaps millions of tribes in the country , to bring everyone together .
So , people hear this and they conclude the following , as did we in doing the study .
Okay , got it . I dont want to talk Stage One .
Thats like , you know ,  Life sucks .  Who wants to talk that way ?
I dont want to talk like they do at the particular DMV thats close to where Dave lives .
I really dont want to just say  Im great ,  because that kind of sounds narcissistic , and then I wont have any friends .
Saying ,  Were great   -  -  that sounds pretty good .
But I should really talk Stage Five , right ?  Life is great . 
Well , in fact , there are three somewhat counter - intuitive findings that come out of all this .
The first one , if you look at the Declaration of Independence and actually read it , the phrase that sticks in many of our minds is things about inalienable rights .
I mean , thats Stage Five , right ? Life is great , oriented only by our values , no other guidance .
In fact , most of the document is written at Stage Two .
 My life sucks because I live under a tyrant , also known as King George .
Were great ! Who is not great ? England ! 
Sorry .
Well , what about other great leaders ? What about Gandhi ?
What about Martin Luther King ?
I mean , surely these were just people who preached ,  Life is great ,  right ?
Just one little bit of happiness and joy after another .
In fact , Martin Luther Kings most famous line was at Stage Three .
He didnt say  We have a dream .  He said ,  I have a dream . 
Why did he do that ? Because most people are not at Stage Five .
Two percent are at Stage One .
About 25 percent are at Stage Two , saying , in effect ,  My life sucks . 
48 percent of working tribes say , these are employed tribes , say ,  Im great and youre not . 
And we have to duke it out every day , so we resort to politics .
Only about 22 percent of tribes are at Stage Four , oriented by our values , saying  Were great .
And our values are beginning to unite us . 
Only two percent , only two percent of tribes get to Stage Five .
And those are the ones that change the world .
So the first little finding from this is that leaders need to be able to talk all the levels so that you can touch every person in society .
But you dont leave them where you found them . Okay ?
Tribes can only hear one level above and below where they are .
So we have to have the ability to talk all the levels , to go to where they are .
And then leaders nudge people within their tribes to the next level .
Id like to show you some examples of this .
One of the people we interviewed was Frank Jordan , former Mayor of San Francisco . Before that he was Chief of Police in San Francisco .
And he grew up essentially in Stage One .
And you know what changed his life ? It was walking into one of these , a Boys and Girls Club .
Now here is what happened to this person who eventually became Mayor of San Francisco .
He went from being alive and passionate at Stage One  -  -  remember ,  Life sucks , despairing hostility , I will do whatever it takes to survive   -  -  to walking into a Boys and Girls Club , folding his arms , sitting down in a chair , and saying ,  Wow . My life really sucks .
I dont know anybody .
I mean , if I was into boxing , like they were , then my life wouldnt suck . But I dont . So it does .
So Im going to sit here in my chair and not do anything . 
In fact , thats progress .
We move people from Stage One to Stage Two by getting them in a new tribe and then , over time , getting them connected .
So , what about moving from Stage Three to Stage Four ?
I want to argue that were doing that right here .
TED represents a set of values , and as we unite around these values , something really interesting begins to emerge .
If you want this experience to live on as something historic , then at the reception tonight Id like to encourage you to do something beyond what people normally do and call networking .
Which is not just to meet new people and extend your reach , extend your influence , but instead , find someone you dont know , and find someone else you dont know , and introduce them .
Thats called a triadic relationship .
See , people who build world - changing tribes do that .
They extend the reach of their tribes by connecting them , not just to myself , so that my following is greater , but I connect people who dont know each other to something greater than themselves .
And ultimately that adds to their values .
But were not done yet . Because then how do we go from Stage Four , which is great , to Stage Five ?
The story that I like to end with is this . It comes out of a place called the Gallup Organization .
You know they do polls , right ?
So its Stage Four . Were great . Who is not great ?
Pretty much everybody else who does polls .
If Gallup releases a poll on the same day that NBC releases a poll , people will pay attention to the Gallup poll . Okay , we understand that .
So , they were bored .
They wanted to change the world . So here is the question someone asked .
 How could we , instead of just polling what Asia thinks or what the United States thinks , or who thinks what about Obama versus McCain or something like that , what does the entire world think ? 
And they found a way to do the first - ever world poll .
They had people involved who were Nobel laureates in economics , who reported being bored .
And suddenly they pulled out sheets of paper and were trying to figure out ,  How do we survey the population of Sub - Saharan Africa ?
How do we survey populations that dont have access to technology , and speak languages we dont speak , and we dont know anyone who speaks those languages . Because in order to achieve on this great mission , we have to be able to do it .
Incidentally , they did pull it off .
And they released the first - ever world poll .
So Id like to leave you with these thoughts .
First of all : we all form tribes , all of us .
Youre in tribes here . Hopefully youre extending the reach of the tribes that you have .
But the question on the table is this : What kind of an impact are the tribes that you are in making ?
Youre hearing one presentation after another , often representing a group of people , a tribe , about how they have changed the world .
If you do what weve talked about , you listen for how people actually communicate in the tribes that youre in .
And you dont leave them where they are . You nudge them forward .
You remember to talk all five culture stages .
Because weve got people in all five , around us .
And the question that Id like to leave you with is this : Will your tribes change the world ?
Thank you very much .
Frederick Balagadde : Bio - lab on a microchip
Drugs alone cant stop disease in sub - Saharan Africa : We need diagnostic tools to match . TED Senior Fellow Frederick Balagadde shows how we can multiply the power and availability of an unwieldy , expensive diagnostic lab  -  -  by miniaturizing it to the size of a chip .
The greatest irony in global health is that the poorest countries carry the largest disease burden .
If we resize the countries of the globe in proportion to the subject of interest , we see that Sub - Saharan Africa is the worst hit region by HIV / AIDS .
This is the most devastating epidemic of our time .
We also see that this region has the least capability in terms of dealing with the disease .
There are very few doctors and , quite frankly , these countries do not have the resources that are needed to cope with such epidemics .
So what the Western countries , developed countries , have generously done is they have proposed to provide free drugs to all people in Third World countries who actually cant afford these medications .
And this has already saved millions of lives , and it has prevented entire economies from capsizing in Sub - Saharan Africa .
But there is a fundamental problem that is killing the efforts in fighting this disease , because if you keep throwing drugs out at people who dont have diagnostic services , you end up creating a problem of drug resistance .
This is already beginning to happen in Sub - Saharan Africa .
The problem is that , what begins as a tragedy in the Third World could easily become a global problem .
And the last thing we want to see is drug - resistant strains of HIV popping up all over the world , because it will make treatment more expensive and it could also restore the pre - ARV carnage of HIV / AIDS .
I experienced this firsthand as a high school student in Uganda .
This was in the 90s during the peak of the HIV epidemic , before there were any ARVs in Sub - Saharan Africa .
And during that time , I actually lost more relatives , as well as the teachers who taught me , to HIV / AIDS .
So this became one of the driving passions of my life , to help find real solutions that could address these kinds of problems .
We all know about the miracle of miniaturization .
Back in the day , computers used to fill this entire room , and people actually used to work inside the computers .
But what electronic miniaturization has done is that it has allowed people to shrink technology into a cell phone .
And Im sure everyone here enjoys cell phones that can actually be used in the remote areas of the world , in the Third World countries .
The good news is that the same technology that allowed miniaturization of electronics is now allowing us to miniaturize biological laboratories .
So , right now , we can actually miniaturize biological and chemistry laboratories onto microfluidic chips .
I was very lucky to come to the US right after high school , and was able to work on this technology and develop some devices .
This is a microfluidic chip that I developed .
A close look at how the technology works : These are channels that are about the size of a human hair  -  -  so you have integrated valves , pumps , mixers and injectors  -  -  so you can fit entire diagnostic experiments onto a microfluidic system .
So what I plan to do with this technology is to actually take the current state of the technology and build an HIV kit in a microfluidic system .
So , with one microfluidic chip , which is the size of an IPhone , you can actually diagnose 100 patients at the same time .
For each patient , we will be able to do up to 100 different viral loads per patient .
And this is only done in four hours , 50 times faster than the current state of the art , at a cost that will be five to 500 times cheaper than the current options .
So this will allow us to create personalized medicines in the Third World at a cost that is actually achievable and make the world a safer place .
I invite your interest as well as your involvement in driving this vision to a point of practical reality .
Thank you very much .
Jonathan Drori : The beautiful tricks of flowers
In this visually dazzling talk , Jonathan Drori shows the extraordinary ways flowering plants  -  -  over a quarter million species  -  -  have evolved to attract insects to spread their pollen : growing landing - strips to guide the insects in , shining in ultraviolet , building elaborate traps , and even mimicking other insects in heat .
Do you know how many species of flowering plants there are ?
There are a quarter of a million  -  -  at least those are the ones we know about  -  -  a quarter of a million species of flowering plants .
And flowers are a real bugger .
Theyre really difficult for plants to produce .
They take an enormous amount of energy and a lot of resources .
Why would they go to that bother ?
And the answer of course , like so many things in the world , is sex .
I know whats on your mind when youre looking at these pictures .
And the reason that sexual reproduction is so important  -  -  there are lots of other things that plants can do to reproduce .
You can take cuttings ; they can sort of have sex with themselves ; they can pollinate themselves .
But they really need to spread their genes to mix with other genes so that they can adapt to environmental niches .
Evolution works that way .
Now the way that plants transmit that information is through pollen .
Some of you may have seen some of these pictures before .
As I say , every home should have a scanning electron microscope to be able to see these .
And there is as many different kinds of pollen as there are flowering plants .
And thats actually rather useful for forensics and so on .
Most pollen that causes hay fever for us is from plants that use the wind to disseminate the pollen , and thats a very inefficient process , which is why it gets up our noses so much .
Because you have to chuck out masses and masses of it , hoping that your sex cells , your male sex cells , which are held within the pollen , will somehow reach another flower just by chance .
So all the grasses , which means all of the cereal crops , and most of the trees have wind - borne pollen .
But most species actually use insects to do their bidding , and thats more intelligent in a way , because the pollen , they dont need so much of it .
The insects and other species can take the pollen , transfer it directly to where its required .
So were aware , obviously , of the relationship between insects and plants .
Theres a symbiotic relationship there , whether its flies or birds or bees , theyre getting something in return , and that something in return is generally nectar .
Sometimes that symbiosis has led to wonderful adaptations  -  -  the hummingbird hawk - moth is beautiful in its adaptation .
The plant gets something , and the hawk - moth spreads the pollen somewhere else .
Plants have evolved to create little landing strips here and there for bees that might have lost their way .
There are markings on many plants that look like other insects .
These are the anthers of a lily , cleverly done so that when the unsuspecting insect lands on it , the anther flips up and whops it on the back with a great load of pollen that it then goes to another plant with .
And theres an orchid that might look to you as if its got jaws , and in a way , it has ; it forces the insect to crawl out , getting covered in pollen that it takes somewhere else .
Orchids : there are 20,000 , at least , species of orchids  -  -  amazingly , amazingly diverse .
And they get up to all sorts of tricks .
They have to try and attract pollinators to do their bidding .
This orchid , known as Darwins orchid , because its one that he studied and made a wonderful prediction when he saw it  -  -  you can see that theres a very long nectar tube that descends down from the orchid .
And basically what the insect has to do  -  -  were in the middle of the flower  -  -  it has to stick its little proboscis right into the middle of that and all the way down that nectar tube to get to the nectar .
And Darwin said , looking at this flower ,  I guess something has coevolved with this . 
And sure enough , theres the insect .
And I mean , normally it kind of rolls it away , but in its erect form , thats what it looks like .
Now you can imagine that if nectar is such a valuable thing and expensive for the plant to produce and it attracts lots of pollinators , then , just as in human sex , people might start to deceive .
They might say ,  Ive got a bit of nectar . Do you want to come and get it ? 
Now this is a plant .
This is a plant here that insects in South Africa just love , and theyve evolved with a long proboscis to get the nectar at the bottom .
And this is the mimic .
So this is a plant that is mimicking the first plant .
And here is the long - probosced fly that has not gotten any nectar from the mimic , because the mimic doesnt give it any nectar . It thought it would get some .
So not only has the fly not got the nectar from the mimic plant , its also  -  -  if you look very closely just at the head end , you can see that its got a bit of pollen that it would be transmitting to another plant , if only some botanist hadnt come along and stuck it to a blue piece of card .
Now deceit carries on through the plant kingdom .
This flower with its black dots : they might look like black dots to us , but if I tell you , to a male insect of the right species , that looks like two females who are really , really hot to trot .
And when the insect gets there and lands on it , dousing itself in pollen , of course , that its going to take to another plant , if you look at the every - home - should - have - one scanning electron microscope picture , you can see that there are actually some patterning there , which is three - dimensional .
So it probably even feels good for the insect , as well as looking good .
And these electron microscope pictures  -  -  heres one of an orchid mimicking an insect  -  -  you can see that different parts of the structure have different colors and different textures to our eye , have very , very different textures to what an insect might perceive .
And this one is evolved to mimic a glossy metallic surface you see on some beetles .
And under the scanning electron microscope , you can see the surface there  -  -  really quite different from the other surfaces we looked at .
Sometimes the whole plant mimics an insect , even to us .
I mean , I think that looks like some sort of flying animal or beast .
Its a wonderful , amazing thing .
This ones clever . Its called obsidian .
I think of it as insidium sometimes .
To the right species of bee , this looks like another very aggressive bee , and it goes and bonks it on the head lots and lots of times to try and drive it away , and , of course , covers itself with pollen .
The other thing it does is that this plant mimics another orchid that has a wonderful store of food for insects .
And this one doesnt have anything for them .
So its deceiving on two levels  -  -  fabulous .
Here we see ylang ylang , the component of many perfumes .
I actually smelt someone with some on earlier .
And the flowers dont really have to be that gaudy .
Theyre sending out a fantastic array of scent to any insect thatll have it .
This one doesnt smell so good .
This is a flower that really , really smells pretty nasty and is designed , again , evolved , to look like carrion .
So flies love this .
They fly in and they pollinate .
This , which is helicodiceros , is also known as dead horse arum .
I dont know what a dead horse actually smells like , but this one probably smells pretty much like it .
Its really horrible .
And blowflies just cant help themselves .
They fly into this thing , and they fly all the way down it .
They lay their eggs in it , thinking its a nice bit of carrion , and not realizing that theres no food for the eggs , that the eggs are going to die , but the plant , meanwhile , has benefited , because the bristles release and the flies disappear to pollinate the next flower  -  -  fantastic .
Heres arum , arum maculatum ,  lords and ladies ,  or  cuckoo - pint  in this country .
I photographed this thing last week in Dorset .
This thing heats up by about 15 degrees above ambient temperature  -  -  amazing .
And if you look down into it , theres this sort of dam past the spadix , flies get attracted by the heat  -  -  which is boiling off volatile chemicals , little midges  -  -  and they get trapped underneath in this container .
They drink this fabulous nectar and then theyre all a bit sticky .
At night they get covered in pollen , which showers down over them , and then the bristles that we saw above , they sort of wilt and allow all these midges out , covered in pollen  -  -  fabulous thing .
Now if you think thats fabulous , this is one of my great favorites .
This is the philodendron selloum .
For anyone here from Brazil , youll know about this plant .
This is the most amazing thing .
That sort of phallic bit there is about a foot long .
And it does something that no other plant that I know of does , and that is that when it flowers  -  -  thats the spadix in the middle there  -  -  for a period of about two days , it metabolizes in a way which is rather similar to mammals .
So instead of having starch , which is the food of plants , it takes something rather similar to brown fat and burns it at such a rate that its burning fat , metabolizing , about the rate of a small cat .
And thats twice the energy output , weight for weight , than a hummingbird  -  -  absolutely astonishing .
This thing does something else which is unusual .
Not only will it raise itself to 115 Fahrenheit , 43 or 44 degrees Centigrade , for two days , but it keeps constant temperature .
Theres a thermoregulation mechanism in there that keeps constant temperature .
 Now why does it do this ,  I hear you ask .
Now wouldnt you know it , theres some beetles that just love to make love at that temperature .
And they get inside , and they get it all on .
And the plant showers them with pollen , and off they go and pollinate .
And what a wonderful thing it is .
Now most pollinators that we think about are insects , but actually in the tropics , many birds and butterflies pollinate .
And many of the tropical flowers are red , and thats because butterflies and birds see similarly to us , we think , and can see the color red very well .
But if you look at the spectrum , birds and us , we see red , green and blue and see that spectrum .
Insects see green , blue and ultraviolet , and they see various shades of ultraviolet .
So theres something that goes on off the end there .
 And wouldnt it be great if we could somehow see what that is ,  I hear you ask .
Well yes we can .
So what is an insect seeing ?
Last week I took these pictures of rock rose , helianthemum , in Dorset .
These are little yellow flowers like we all see , little yellow flowers all over the place .
And this is what it looks like with visible light .
This is what it looks like if you take out the red .
Most bees dont perceive red .
And then I put some ultraviolet filters on my camera and took a very , very long exposure with the particular frequencies of ultraviolet light and this is what I got .
And thats a real fantastic bulls eye .
Now we dont know exactly what a bee sees , any more than you know what Im seeing when I call this red .
We cant know whats going on in  -  -  let alone an insects  -  -  another human beings mind .
But the contrast will look something like that , so standing out a lot from the background .
Heres another little flower  -  -  different range of ultraviolet frequencies , different filters to match the pollinators .
And thats the sort of thing that it would be seeing .
Just in case you think that all yellow flowers have this property  -  -  no flower was damaged in the process of this shot ; it was just attached to the tripod , not killed  -  -  then under ultraviolet light , look at that .
And that could be the basis of a sunscreen because sunscreens work by absorbing ultraviolet light .
So maybe the chemical in that would be useful .
Finally , theres one of evening primrose that Bjorn Rorslett from Norway sent me  -  -  fantastic hidden pattern .
And I love the idea of something hidden .
I think theres something poetic here , that these pictures taken with ultraviolet filter , the main use of that filter is for astronomers to take pictures of Venus  -  -  actually the clouds of Venus .
Thats the main use of that filter .
Venus , of course , is the god of love and fertility , which is the flower story .
And just as flowers spend a lot of effort trying to get pollinators to do their bidding , theyve also somehow managed to persuade us to plant great fields full of them and give them to each other at times of birth and death , and particularly at marriage , which , when you think of it , is the moment that encapsulates the transfer of genetic material from one organism to another .
Thank you very much .
Srdja Popovic : How to topple a dictator
2011 was a year of people - powered resistance , starting with Arab Spring and spreading across the world . How did it work ? Srdja Popovic lays out the plans , skills and tools each movement needs  -  -  from nonviolent tactics to a sense of humor . 
Good afternoon . I am proud to be here at TEDxKrakow .
Ill try to speak a little bit today about a phenomenon which can and is actually changing the world , and whose name is people power .
Ill start with the anecdote , or for those of you who are Monty Python lovers , a Monty Python type of sketch .
Here it is . It is December 15 , 2010 .
Somebody gives you a bet . You will look at a crystal ball and you will see the future . The future will be accurate .
But you need to share it with the world . Okay ?
Curiosity killed the cat . You take the bet .
You look at the crystal ball . One hour later , you are sitting in a building on the national TV in a talkshow , and you tell the story .
 Before the end of 2011 , Ben Ali and Mubarak and Gaddafi will be down and prosecuted .
Saleh of Yemen and Assad of Syria would be either challenged or already on their knees .
Osama bin Laden will be dead , and Ratko Mladic will be in the Hague . 
Now , the anchor watches you with a strange gaze on his face , and then on the top of it you add ,  And thousands of the young people from Athens , Madrid and New York will demonstrate for social justice , claiming that they are inspired with Arabs . 
Next thing you know , two guys in white appear .
They give you the strange t - shirt , take you to the nearest mental institution .
So I would like to speak a little bit about the phenomenon which is behind what already seems to be the very bad year for bad guys , and this phenomenon is called people power .
Well , people power has been there for a while .
It helped Gandhi kick the Brits from India .
It helped Martin Luther King win a historic racial struggle .
It helped local Lech Walesa to kick out one million Soviet troops from Poland and beginning the end of the Soviet Union as we know it .
So whats new in it ? What seems to be very new , which is the idea I would like to share with you today , that there is a set of rules and skills which can be learned and taught in order to perform successful nonviolent struggle .
If this is true , we can help these movements .
Well , first one , analytic skills .
Ill try where it all started in the Middle East , and for so many years we were living with completely the wrong perception of the Middle East .
It was looking like the frozen region , literally a refrigerator , and there are only two types of meals there : steak , which stands for a Mubarak , Ben Ali - type of military police dictatorship , or a potato , which stands for Tehran types of theocracies .
And everybody was amazed when the refrigerator opened and millions of young , mainly secular people step out to do the change . Guess what ? They didnt watch the demographics .
What is the average age of Egyptians ? 24 .
How long was Mubarak in power ? 31 .
So this system : just obsolete . They expired , and young people of the Arab World have awakened one morning and understood that power lies in their hands .
The rest is the year in front of us . And guess what ?
The same Generation Epsilon with their rules , with their tools , with their games and with their language , which sounds a little bit strange to me . I am 38 now .
And can you look at the age of the people on the streets of Europe ?
It seems that Generation Epsilon is coming .
Now let me set another example .
Im meeting different people throughout the world , and they are , you know , academics and professors and doctors , and they will always talk conditions .
They will say ,  People power will work only if the regime is not too oppressive . 
They will say ,  People power will work if the annual income of the country is between X and Z . 
They will say ,  People power will work only if there is a foreign pressure . 
They will say ,  People power will work only if there is no oil . 
And , I mean , there is a set of conditions .
Well , the news here is that your skills  that you  bring in the conflict seem to be more important than the conditions , namely skills of unity , planning , and maintaining nonviolent discipline .
Let me give you the example .
I am coming from a country called Serbia .
It took us 10 years to unite 18 opposition party leaders , with their big egos , behind one single candidate against Balkan dictator Slobodan Milosevic .
Guess what ? That was the day of his defeat .
You look at the Egyptians , they fire on Tahrir Square , they get rid of their individual symbols .
They appear on the street only with the flag of Egypt .
I will give you a counter - example .
You see nine presidential candidates running against Lukashenko .
You will know the outcome .
So unity is a big thing , and this can be achieved .
Same with planning . Somebody has lied to you about the successful and spontaneous nonviolent revolution ?
That thing doesnt exist in the world .
Whenever you see young people in front of the road trying to fraternize with the police or military , somebody was thinking about it before .
Now , at the end , nonviolent discipline , and this is probably the game - changer .
If you maintain nonviolent discipline , you will exclusively win .
You have 100,000 people in a nonviolent march , and one idiot or agent provocateur is throwing stones , guess what takes all the cameras ? That one guy .
One single act of violence can literally destroy your movement .
Now let me move to another place .
Its selection of strategies and tactics .
There are certain rules in nonviolent struggle you may follow .
First , you start small .
Second , you pick the battles you can win .
Its only 200 of us in this room .
We wont call for the March of Millions .
But what if we organize spraying graffiti throughout the night all over Krakow city ? The city will know .
So we pick the tactics which accommodates to the event , especially this thing we call the small tactics of dispersion .
Theyre very useful in a violent oppression .
We are actually witnessing the picture of one of the best tactics ever used .
It was on Tahrir Square , where the international community was constantly frightened that the Islamists will overtake the revolution . Well , theyve organized Christians protecting Muslims , who are there praying , Coptic wedding cheered by thousands of Muslims .
The world has just changed the picture , but somebody was thinking about this previously .
So there are so many things you can do instead of getting into one place , shouting and showing off in front of the security forces .
Now there is also another very important dynamic , and this is a dynamic normally analytics dont see .
This is dynamics between fear and apathy on one side and enthusiasm and humor on another side .
So it works like in a video game .
You have a fear high , you have status quo .
You have enthusiasm higher , you see fear starting to melt .
Day two , you see people running towards police instead of from the police .
In Egypt , you can tell that something is happening there .
And then its about humor . Humor is such a powerful game - changer , and of course it was very big in Poland .
And you know , we were just a small group of crazy students in Serbia when we made this big skit .
We put the big petrol barrel with a portrait picture of Mr. President on it in the middle of the Main Street . There was a hole on the top so you could literally come , put a coin in , get a baseball bat , and pow , hit his face .
Sounds loud . And within the minutes , we were sitting in a nearby cafe having coffee , and there was a queue of people waiting to do this lovely thing .
Well , thats just the beginning of the show .
The real show starts when the police appears .
What will they do ? Arrest us ? We are nowhere to be seen .
We are three blocks away observing it from our espresso bar .
Arrest the shoppers with kids ? Doesnt make sense .
Of course , you could bet they have done the most stupid thing : They arrested the barrel . And now the picture of the smashed face on the barrel with the policeman dragging them to the police car , that was the best day for the photographers from newspapers that they ever will have .
So , I mean , these are the things you can do , and you can always use the humor .
There is also one big thing about the humor : It really hurts , because these guys really are taking themselves too seriously .
When you start to mock them , it hurts .
Now , everybody is talking about His Majesty , the Internet , and it is also a very useful skill , but dont rush to label things like Facebook Revolution , Twitter Revolution .
Dont mix tools with the substance .
It is true that the Internet and new media are very useful in making things faster and cheaper .
They make it also a bit safer for the participants because they give the part of anonymity .
We are watching the great example of something else the Internet can do .
It can put the price tag of state - sponsored violence over nonviolent protesters .
This is a famous group , We are all Khaled Said , made by Wael Ghonim in Egypt and his friend .
This is the mutilated face of the guy who was beaten by the police .
This is how he became the public , and this is what probably became the straw which broke the camels back .
But here is also the bad news .
The nonviolent struggle is won in the real world , in the streets . You will never change your society towards democracy or economics if you sit down and click .
There are risks to be taken and there are living people who are winning the struggle .
Well , million dollar question : What will happen in the Arab World ?
And though young people from the Arab World were pretty successful in bringing down three dictators , shaking the region , kind of persuading clever kings from Jordan and Morocco doing substantial reforms , it is yet to be seen what will be the outcome , whether the Egyptians and Tunisians will make it through the transition or this will end in bloody ethnic and religious conflict , whether the Syrians will maintain nonviolent discipline , faced with the brutal daily violence which kills thousands already , or they will slip into violent struggle and make ugly civil war .
Will these revolutions be whole like through the transitions to democracy or be overtaken by military or extremists of all kinds ? We can not tell .
Same works for the Western sector , where you can see all of these excited young people protesting around the world , occupying this , occupying that .
Are they going to become the world wave ?
Are they going to find their skills , their enthusiasm , and their strategy to find what they really want and push for the reform , or will they just stay complaining about the endless list of the things they hate ?
This is the difference between two towns .
Now , what  do  the statistics have ?
My friends book , Maria Stephans book , talks a lot about violent and nonviolent struggle , and there are some shocking data .
If you look at the last 35 years and different social transitions from dictatorship to democracy , you will see that out of 67 different cases , in 50 of these cases it was nonviolent struggle which was the key power .
This is one more reason to look at this phenomenon .
This is one more reason to look at the Generation Epsilon , enough for me to give them credit and hope that they will find their skills and their courage to use the nonviolent struggle and thus fix at least a part of the mess our generation is making in this world .
Thank you .
Gordon Brown : Wiring a web for global good
Were at a unique moment in history , says UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown : we can use todays interconnectedness to develop our shared global ethic  -  -  and work together to confront the challenges of poverty , security , climate change and the economy .
Can I say how delighted I am to be away from the calm of Westminster and Whitehall ?
This is Kim , a nine - year - old Vietnam girl , her back ruined by napalm , and she awakened the conscience of the nation of America to begin to end the Vietnam War .
This is Birhan , who was the Ethiopian girl who launched Live Aid in the 1980s , 15 minutes away from death when she was rescued , and that picture of her being rescued is one that went round the world .
This is Tiananmen Square .
A man before a tank became a picture that became a symbol for the whole world of resistance .
This next is the Sudanese girl , a few moments from death , a vulture hovering in the background , a picture that went round the world and shocked people into action on poverty .
This is Neda , the Iranian girl who was shot while at a demonstration with her father in Iran only a few weeks ago , and she is now the focus , rightly so , of the YouTube generation .
And what do all these pictures and events have in common ?
What they have in common is what we see unlocks what we can not see .
What we see unlocks the invisible ties and bonds of sympathy that bring us together to become a human community .
What these pictures demonstrate is that we do feel the pain of others , however distantly .
What I think these pictures demonstrate is that we do believe in something bigger than ourselves .
What these pictures demonstrate is that there is a moral sense across all religions , across all faiths , across all continents  -  -  a moral sense that not only do we share the pain of others , and believe in something bigger than ourselves but we have a duty to act when we see things that are wrong that need righted , see injuries that need to be corrected , see problems that need to be rectified .
There is a story about Olof Palme , the Swedish Prime Minister , going to see Ronald Reagan in America in the 1980s .
Before he arrived Ronald Reagan said  -  -  and he was the Swedish Social Democratic Prime Minister  -  -   Isnt this man a communist ? 
The reply was ,  No , Mr President , hes an anti - communist . 
And Ronald Reagan said ,  I dont care what kind of communist he is ! 
Ronald Reagan asked Olof Palme , the Social Democratic Prime Minister of Sweden ,  Well , what do you believe in ? Do you want to abolish the rich ? 
He said ,  No , I want to abolish the poor . 
Our responsibility is to let everyone have the chance to realize their potential to the full .
I believe there is a moral sense and a global ethic that commands attention from people of every religion and every faith , and people of no faith .
But I think whats new is that we now have the capacity to communicate instantaneously across frontiers right across the world .
We now have the capacity to find common ground with people who we will never meet , but who we will meet through the Internet and through all the modern means of communication ; that we now have the capacity to organize and take collective action together to deal with the problem or an injustice that we want to deal with ; and I believe that this makes this a unique age in human history , and it is the start of what I would call the creation of a truly global society .
Go back 200 years when the slave trade was under pressure from William Wilberforce and all the protesters .
They protested across Britain .
They won public opinion over a long period of time .
But it took 24 years for the campaign to be successful .
What could they have done with the pictures that they could have shown if they were able to use the modern means of communication to win peoples hearts and minds ?
Or if you take Eglantyne Jebb , the woman who created Save the Children 90 years ago .
She was so appalled by what was happening in Austria as a result of the First World War and what was happening to children who were part of the defeated families of Austria , that in Britain she wanted to take action , but she had to go house to house , leaflet to leaflet , to get people to attend a rally in the Royal Albert Hall that eventually gave birth to Save the Children , an international organization that is now fully recognized as one of the great institutions in our land and in the world .
But what more could she have done if shed had the modern means of communications available to her to create a sense that the injustice that people saw had to be acted upon immediately ?
Now look at whats happened in the last 10 years .
In Philippines in 2001 , President Estrada  -  -  a million people texted each other about the corruption of that regime , eventually brought it down and it was , of course , called the  coup de text . 
Then you have in Zimbabwe the first election under Robert Mugabe a year ago .
Because people were able to take mobile phone photographs of what was happening at the polling stations , it was impossible for that Premier to fix that election in the way that he wanted to do .
Or take Burma and the monks that were blogging out , a country that nobody knew anything about that was happening , until these blogs told the world that there was a repression , meaning that lives were being lost and people were being persecuted and Aung San Suu Kyi , who is one of the great prisoners of conscience of the world , had to be listened to .
Then take Iran itself , and what people are doing today : following what happened to Neda , people who are preventing the security services of Iran finding those people who are blogging out of Iran , any by everybody who is blogging , changing their address to Tehran , Iran , and making it difficult for the security services .
Take , therefore , what modern technology is capable of : the power of our moral sense allied to the power of communications and our ability to organize internationally .
That , in my view , gives us the first opportunity as a community to fundamentally change the world .
Foreign policy can never be the same again . It can not be run by elites ; its got to be run by listening to the public opinions of peoples who are blogging , who are communicating with each other around the world .
200 years ago the problem we had to solve was slavery .
150 years ago I suppose the main problem in a country like ours was how young people , children , had the right to education .
100 years ago in most countries in Europe , the pressure was for the right to vote .
50 years ago the pressure was for the right to social security and welfare .
In the last 50 - 60 years we have seen fascism , anti - Semitism , racism , apartheid , discrimination on the basis of sex and gender and sexuality ; all these have come under pressure because of the campaigns that have been run by people to change the world .
I was with Nelson Mandela a year ago , when he was in London .
I was at a concert that he was attending to mark his birthday and for the creation of new resources for his foundation .
I was sitting next to Nelson Mandela  -  -  I was very privileged to do so  -  -  when Amy Winehouse came onto the stage .
And Nelson Mandela was quite surprised at the appearance of the singer and I was explaining to him at the time who she was .
Amy Winehouse said ,  Nelson Mandela and I have a lot in common .
My husband too has spent a long time in prison . 
Nelson Mandela then went down to the stage and he summarized the challenge for us all .
He said in his lifetime he had climbed a great mountain , the mountain of challenging and then defeating racial oppression and defeating apartheid .
He said that there was a greater challenge ahead , the challenge of poverty , of climate change  -  -  global challenges that needed global solutions and needed the creation of a truly global society .
We are the first generation which is in a position to do this .
Combine the power of a global ethic with the power of our ability to communicate and organize globally , with the challenges that we now face , most of which are global in their nature .
Climate change can not be solved in one country , but has got to be solved by the world working together .
A financial crisis , just as we have seen , could not be solved by America alone or Europe alone ; it needed the world to work together .
Take the problems of security and terrorism and , equally , the problem of human rights and development : they can not be solved by Africa alone ; they can not be solved by America or Europe alone .
We can not solve these problems unless we work together .
So the great project of our generation , it seems to me , is to build for the first time , out of a global ethic and our global ability to communicate and organize together , a truly global society , built on that ethic but with institutions that can serve that global society and make for a different future .
We have now , and are the first generation with , the power to do this .
Take climate change . Is it not absolutely scandalous that we have a situation where we know that there is a climate change problem , where we know also that that will mean we have to give more resources to the poorest countries to deal with that , when we want to create a global carbon market , but there is no global institution that people have been able to agree upon to deal with this problem ?
One of the things that has got to come out of Copenhagen in the next few months is an agreement that there will be a global environmental institution that is able to deal with the problems of persuading the whole of the world to move along a climate - change agenda .
One of the reasons why an institution is not in itself enough is that we have got to persuade people around the world to change their behavior as well , so you need that global ethic of fairness and responsibility across the generations .
Take the financial crisis .
If people in poorer countries can be hit by a crisis that starts in New York or starts in the sub - prime market of the United States of America .
If people can find that that sub - prime product has been transferred across nations many , many times until it ends up in banks in Iceland or the rest in Britain , and peoples ordinary savings are affected by it , then you can not rely on a system of national supervision .
You need in the long run for stability , for economic growth , for jobs , as well as for financial stability , global economic institutions that make sure that growth to be sustained has to be shared , and are built on the principle that the prosperity of this world is indivisible .
So another challenge for our generation is to create global institutions that reflect our ideas of fairness and responsibility , not the ideas that were the basis of the last stage of financial development over these recent years .
Then take development and take the partnership we need between our countries and the rest of the world , the poorest part of the world .
We do not have the basis of a proper partnership for the future , and yet , out of peoples desire for a global ethic and a global society that can be done .
I have just been talking to the President of Sierra Leone .
This is a country of six and a half million people , but it has only 80 doctors ; it has 200 nurses ; it has 120 midwives .
You can not begin to build a healthcare system for six million people with such limited resources .
Or take the girl I met when I was in Tanzania , a girl called Miriam .
She was 11 years old ; her parents had both died from AIDS , her mother and then her father .
She was an AIDS orphan being handed across different extended families to be cared for .
She herself was suffering from HIV ; she was suffering from tuberculosis .
I met her in a field , she was ragged , she had no shoes .
When you looked in her eyes , any girl at the age of eleven is looking forward to the future , but there was an unreachable sadness in that girls eyes and if I could have translated that to the rest of the world for that moment , I believe that all the work that it had done for the global HIV / AIDS fund would be rewarded by people being prepared to make donations .
We must then build a proper relationship between the richest and the poorest countries based on our desire that they are able to fend for themselves with the investment that is necessary in their agriculture , so that Africa is not a net importer of food , but an exporter of food .
Take the problems of human rights and the problems of security in so many countries around the world .
Burma is in chains , Zimbabwe is a human tragedy , in Sudan thousands of people have died unnecessarily for wars that we could prevent .
In the Rwanda Childrens Museum , there is a photograph of a 10 - year - old boy and the Childrens Museum is commemorating the lives that were lost in the Rwandan genocide where a million people died .
There is a photograph of a boy called David .
Beside that photograph there is the information about his life .
It said  David , age 10 . 
David : ambition to be a doctor .
Favorite sport : football . What did he enjoy most ?
Making people laugh .
How did he die ?
Tortured to death .
Last words said to his mother who was also tortured to death :  Dont worry . The United Nations are coming . 
And we never did .
And that young boy believed our promises that we would help people in difficulty in Rwanda , and we never did .
So we have got to create in this world also institutions for peacekeeping and humanitarian aid , but also for reconstruction and security for some of the conflict - ridden states of the world .
So my argument today is basically this .
We have the means by which we could create a truly global society .
The institutions of this global society can be created by our endeavors .
That global ethic can infuse the fairness and responsibility that is necessary for these institutions to work , but we should not lose the chance in this generation , in this decade in particular , with President Obama in America , with other people working with us around the world , to create global institutions for the environment , and for finance , and for security and for development , that make sense of our responsibility to other peoples , our desire to bind the world together , and our need to tackle problems that everybody knows exist .
It is said that in Ancient Rome that when Cicero spoke to his audiences , people used to turn to each other and say about Cicero ,  Great speech . 
But it is said that in Ancient Greece when Demosthenes spoke to his audiences , people turned to each other and didnt say  Great speech . 
They said ,  Lets march . 
We should be marching towards a global society .
Thank you .
Oliver Sacks : What hallucination reveals about our minds
Neurologist and author Oliver Sacks brings our attention to Charles Bonnet syndrome  -  -  when visually impaired people experience lucid hallucinations . He describes the experiences of his patients in heartwarming detail and walks us through the biology of this under - reported phenomenon .
We see with the eyes , but we see with the brain as well .
And seeing with the brain is often called imagination .
And we are familiar with the landscapes of our own imagination , our inscapes . Weve lived with them all our lives .
But there are also hallucinations as well , and hallucinations are completely different .
They dont seem to be of our creation .
They dont seem to be under our control .
They seem to come from the outside , and to mimic perception .
So I am going to be talking about hallucinations , and a particular sort of visual hallucination which I see among my patients .
A few months ago , I got a phone call from a nursing home where I work .
They told me that one of their residents , an old lady in her 90s , was seeing things , and they wondered if shed gone bonkers or , because she was an old lady , whether shed had a stroke , or whether she had Alzheimers .
And so they asked me if I would come and see Rosalie , the old lady .
I went in to see her .
It was evident straight away that she was perfectly sane and lucid and of good intelligence , but shed been very startled and very bewildered , because shed been seeing things .
And she told me  -  -  the nurses hadnt mentioned this  -  -  that she was blind , that she had been completely blind from macular degeneration for five years .
But now , for the last few days , shed been seeing things .
So I said ,  What sort of things ? 
And she said ,  People in Eastern dress , in drapes , walking up and down stairs .
A man who turns towards me and smiles .
But he has huge teeth on one side of his mouth .
Animals too .
I see a white building . Its snowing , a soft snow .
I see this horse with a harness , dragging the snow away .
Then , one night , the scene changes .
I see cats and dogs walking towards me .
They come to a certain point and then stop .
Then it changes again .
I see a lot of children . They are walking up and down stairs .
They wear bright colors , rose and blue , like Eastern dress . 
Sometimes , she said , before the people come on , she may hallucinate pink and blue squares on the floor , which seem to go up to the ceiling .
I said ,  Is this like a dream ? 
And she said ,  No , its not like a dream . Its like a movie . 
She said ,  Its got color . Its got motion .
But its completely silent , like a silent movie . 
And she said that its a rather boring movie .
She said ,  All these people with Eastern dress , walking up and down , very repetitive , very limited . 
And she has a sense of humor .
She knew it was a hallucination .
But she was frightened . Shed lived 95 years and shed never had a hallucination before .
She said that the hallucinations were unrelated to anything she was thinking or feeling or doing , that they seemed to come on by themselves , or disappear .
She had no control over them .
She said she didnt recognize any of the people or places in the hallucinations .
And none of the people or the animals , well , they all seemed oblivious of her .
And she didnt know what was going on .
She wondered if she was going mad or losing her mind .
Well , I examined her carefully .
She was a bright old lady , perfectly sane . She had no medical problems .
She wasnt on any medications which could produce hallucinations .
But she was blind .
And I then said to her ,  I think I know what you have . 
I said ,  There is a special form of visual hallucination which may go with deteriorating vision or blindness .
This was originally described ,  I said ,  right back in the 18th century , by a man called Charles Bonnet .
And you have Charles Bonnet syndrome .
There is nothing wrong with your brain . There is nothing wrong with your mind .
You have Charles Bonnet syndrome . 
And she was very relieved at this , that there was nothing seriously the matter , and also rather curious .
She said ,  Who is this Charles Bonnet ? 
She said ,  Did he have them himself ? 
And she said ,  Tell all the nurses that I have Charles Bonnet syndrome . 
 Im not crazy . Im not demented . I have Charles Bonnet syndrome . 
Well , so I did tell the nurses .
Now this , for me , is a common situation .
I work in old - age homes , largely .
I see a lot of elderly people who are hearing impaired or visually impaired .
About 10 percent of the hearing impaired people get musical hallucinations .
And about 10 percent of the visually impaired people get visual hallucinations .
You dont have to be completely blind , only sufficiently impaired .
Now with the original description in the 18th century , Charles Bonnet did not have them .
His grandfather had these hallucinations .
His grandfather was a magistrate , an elderly man .
Hed had cataract surgery .
His vision was pretty poor .
And in 1759 , he described to his grandson various things he was seeing .
The first thing he said was he saw a handkerchief in midair .
It was a large blue handkerchief with four orange circles .
And he knew it was a hallucination .
You dont have handkerchiefs in midair .
And then he saw a big wheel in midair .
But sometimes he wasnt sure whether he was hallucinating or not , because the hallucinations would fit in the context of the visions .
So on one occasion , when his granddaughters were visiting them , he said ,  And who are these handsome young men with you ? 
And they said ,  Alas , Grandpapa , there are no handsome young men . 
And then the handsome young men disappeared .
Its typical of these hallucinations that they may come in a flash and disappear in a flash .
They dont usually fade in and out .
They are rather sudden , and they change suddenly .
Charles Lullin , the grandfather , saw hundreds of different figures , different landscapes of all sorts .
On one occasion , he saw a man in a bathrobe smoking a pipe , and realized it was himself .
That was the only figure he recognized .
On one occasion when he was walking in the streets of Paris , he saw  -  -  this was real  -  -  a scaffolding .
But when he got back home , he saw a miniature of the scaffolding six inches high , on his study table .
This repetition of perception is sometimes called palinopsia .
With him and with Rosalie , what seems to be going on  -  -  and Rosalie said ,  Whats going on ?   -  -  and I said that as you lose vision , as the visual parts of the brain are no longer getting any input , they become hyperactive and excitable , and they start to fire spontaneously .
And you start to see things .
The things you see can be very complicated indeed .
With another patient of mine , who , also had some vision , the vision she had could be disturbing .
On one occasion , she said she saw a man in a striped shirt in a restaurant .
And he turned around . And then he divided into six figures in striped shirts , who started walking towards her .
And then the six figures came together again , like a concertina .
Once , when she was driving , or rather , her husband was driving , the road divided into four and she felt herself going simultaneously up four roads .
She had very mobile hallucinations as well .
A lot of them had to do with a car .
Sometimes she would see a teenage boy sitting on the hood of the car .
He was very tenacious and he moved rather gracefully when the car turned .
And then when they came to a stop , the boy would do a sudden vertical takeoff , 100 foot in the air , and then disappear .
Another patient of mine had a different sort of hallucination .
This was a woman who didnt have trouble with her eyes , but the visual parts of her brain , a little tumor in the occipital cortex .
And , above all , she would see cartoons .
These cartoons would be transparent and would cover half the visual field , like a screen .
And especially she saw cartoons of Kermit the Frog .
Now , I dont watch Sesame Street , but she made a point of saying ,  Why Kermit ?  She said ,  Kermit the Frog means nothing to me .
You know , I was wondering about Freudian determinants .
Why Kermit ?
Kermit the Frog means nothing to me . 
She didnt mind the cartoons too much .
But what did disturb her was she got very persistent images or hallucinations of faces and as with Rosalie , the faces were often deformed , with very large teeth or very large eyes .
And these frightened her .
Well , what is going on with these people ?
As a physician , I have to try and define whats going on , and to reassure people , especially to reassure them that theyre not going insane .
Something like 10 percent , as I said , of visually impaired people get these .
But no more than one percent of the people acknowledge them , because they are afraid they will be seen as insane or something .
And if they do mention them to their own doctors they may be misdiagnosed .
In particular , the notion is that if you see things or hear things , youre going mad , but the psychotic hallucinations are quite different .
Psychotic hallucinations , whether they are visual or vocal , they address you . They accuse you .
They seduce you . They humiliate you .
They jeer at you .
You interact with them .
There is none of this quality of being addressed with these Charles Bonnet hallucinations .
There is a film . Youre seeing a film which has nothing to do with you , or thats how people think about it .
There is also a rare thing called temporal lobe epilepsy , and sometimes , if one has this , one may feel oneself transported back to a time and place in the past .
Youre at a particular road junction .
You smell chestnuts roasting .
You hear the traffic . All the senses are involved .
And youre waiting for your girl .
And its that Tuesday evening back in 1982 .
And the temporal lobe hallucinations are all - sense hallucinations , full of feeling , full of familiarity , located in space and time , coherent , dramatic .
The Charles Bonnet ones are quite different .
So in the Charles Bonnet hallucinations , you have all sorts of levels , from the geometrical hallucinations  -  -  the pink and blue squares the woman had  -  -  up to quite elaborate hallucinations with figures and especially faces .
Faces , and sometimes deformed faces , are the single commonest thing in these hallucinations .
And one of the second commonest is cartoons .
So , what is going on ?
Fascinatingly , in the last few years , its been possible to do functional brain imagery , to do fMRI on people as they are hallucinating .
And in fact , to find that different parts of the visual brain are activated as they are hallucinating .
When people have these simple geometrical hallucinations , the primary visual cortex is activated .
This is the part of the brain which perceives edges and patterns .
You dont form images with your primary visual cortex .
When images are formed , a higher part of the visual cortex is involved in the temporal lobe .
And in particular , one area of the temporal lobe is called the fusiform gyrus .
And its known that if people have damage in the fusiform gyrus , they maybe lose the ability to recognize faces .
But if there is an abnormal activity in the fusiform gyrus , they may hallucinate faces , and this is exactly what you find in some of these people .
There is an area in the anterior part of this gyrus where teeth and eyes are represented , and that part of the gyrus is activated when people get the deformed hallucinations .
There is another part of the brain which is especially activated when one sees cartoons .
Its activated when one recognizes cartoons , when one draws cartoons , and when one hallucinates them .
Its very interesting that that should be specific .
There are other parts of the brain which are specifically involved with the recognition and hallucination of buildings and landscapes .
Around 1970 , it was found that there were not only parts of the brain , but particular cells .
 Face cells  were discovered around 1970 .
And now we know that there are hundreds of other sorts of cells , which can be very , very specific .
So you may not only have  car  cells , you may have  Aston Martin  cells .
I saw an Aston Martin this morning .
I had to bring it in .
And now its in there somewhere .
Now , at this level , in whats called the inferotemporal cortex , there are only visual images , or figments or fragments .
Its only at higher levels that the other senses join in and there are connections with memory and emotion .
And in the Charles Bonnet syndrome , you dont go to those higher levels .
Youre in these levels of inferior visual cortex where you have thousands and tens of thousands and millions of images , or figments , or fragmentary figments , all neurally encoded in particular cells or small clusters of cells .
Normally these are all part of the integrated stream of perception , or imagination , and one is not conscious of them .
It is only if one is visually impaired or blind that the process is interrupted .
And instead of getting normal perception , youre getting an anarchic , convulsive stimulation , or release , of all of these visual cells in the inferotemporal cortex .
So , suddenly you see a face . Suddenly you see a car .
Suddenly this , and suddenly that .
The mind does its best to organize and to give some sort of coherence to this , but not terribly successfully .
When these were first described , it was thought that they could be interpreted like dreams .
But in fact people say ,  I dont recognize the people . I cant form any associations . 
 Kermit means nothing to me . 
You dont get anywhere thinking of them as dreams .
Well , Ive more or less said what I wanted .
I think I just want to recapitulate and say this is common .
Think of the number of blind people .
There must be hundreds of thousands of blind people who have these hallucinations , but are too scared to mention them .
So this sort of thing needs to be brought into notice , for patients , for doctors , for the public .
Finally , I think they are infinitely interesting and valuable , for giving one some insight as to how the brain works .
Charles Bonnet said , 250 years ago  -  -  he wondered how , thinking these hallucinations , how , as he put it , the theater of the mind could be generated by the machinery of the brain .
Now , 250 years later , I think were beginning to glimpse how this is done .
Thanks very much .
That was superb . Thank you so much .
You speak about these things with so much insight and empathy for your patients .
Have you yourself experienced any of the syndromes you write about ?
Oliver Sacks : I was afraid youd ask that .
Well , yeah , a lot of them .
And actually Im a little visually impaired myself .
Im blind in one eye , and not terribly good in the other .
And I see the geometrical hallucinations .
But they stop there .
And they dont disturb you ?
Because you understand whats doing it , it doesnt make you worried ?
OS : Well they dont disturb me any more than my tinnitus , which I ignore .
They occasionally interest me , and I have many pictures of them in my notebooks .
Ive gone and had an fMRI myself , to see how my visual cortex is taking over .
And when I see all these hexagons and complex things , which I also have , in visual migraine , I wonder whether everyone sees things like this , and whether things like cave art or ornamental art may have been derived from them a bit .
That was an utterly , utterly fascinating talk .
Thank you so much for sharing .
OS : Thank you . Thank you .
Bart Weetjens : How I taught rats to sniff out land mines
No one knows exactly how many landmines still litter the world , but its safe to safe : millions , waiting to kill and maim unsuspecting civilians . Clearing them is slow , expensive and dangerous . The founder of Apopo . Bart Weetjens , talks about his extraordinary project : training rats to sniff out land mines . He shows clips of his  hero rats  in action , and previews his works next phase : teaching them to turn up tuberculosis in the lab .
Im here today to share with you an extraordinary journey  -  -  extraordinarily rewarding journey , actually  -  -  which brought me into training rats to save human lives by detecting landmines and tuberculosis .
As a child , I had two passions .
One was a passion for rodents .
I had all kinds of rats , mice , hamsters , gerbils , squirrels .
You name it , I bred it , and I sold them to pet shops .
I also had a passion for Africa .
Growing up in a multicultural environment , we had African students in the house , and I learned about their stories , so different backgrounds , dependency on imported know - how , goods , services , exuberant cultural diversity .
Africa was truly fascinating for me .
I became an industrial engineer , engineer in product development , and I focused on appropriate detection technologies , actually the first appropriate technologies for developing countries .
I started working in the industry , but I wasnt really happy to contribute to a material consumer society in a linear , extracting and manufacturing mode .
I quit my job to focus on the real world problem : landmines .
Were talking 95 now .
Princess Diana is announcing on TV that landmines form a structural barrier to any development , which is really true .
As long as these devices are there , or there is suspicion of landmines , you cant really enter into the land .
Actually , there was an appeal worldwide for new detectors sustainable in the environments where theyre needed to produce , which is mainly in the developing world .
We chose rats .
Why would you choose rats ?
Because , arent they vermin ?
Well , actually rats are , in contrary to what most people think about them , rats are highly sociable creatures .
And actually , our product  -  -  what you see here .
Theres a target somewhere here .
You see an operator , a trained African with his rats in front who actually are left and right .
There , the animal finds a mine .
It scratches on the soil .
And the animal comes back for a food reward .
Very , very simple .
Very sustainable in this environment .
Here , the animal gets its food reward .
And thats how it works .
Very , very simple .
Now why would you use rats ?
Rats have been used since the 50s last century , in all kinds of experiments .
Rats have more genetic material allocated to olfaction than any other mammal species .
Theyre extremely sensitive to smell .
Moreover , they have the mechanisms to map all these smells and to communicate about it .
Now how do we communicate with rats ?
Well dont talk rat , but we have a clicker , a standard method for animal training , which you see there .
A clicker , which makes a particular sound with which you can reinforce particular behaviors .
First of all , we associate the click sound with a food reward , which is smashed banana and peanuts together in a syringe .
Once the animal knows click , food , click , food , click , food  -  -  so click is food  -  -  we bring it in a cage with a hole , and actually the animal learns to stick the nose in the hole under which a target scent is placed , and to do that for five seconds  -  -  five seconds , which is long for a rat .
Once the animal knows this , we make the task a bit more difficult .
It learns how to find the target smell in a cage with several holes , up to 10 holes .
Then the animal learns to walk on a leash in the open and find targets .
In the next step , animals learn to find real mines in real minefields .
They are tested and accredited according to International Mine Action Standards , just like dogs have to pass a test .
This consists of 400 square meters .
Theres a number of mines placed blindly , and the team of trainer and their rat have to find all the targets .
If the animal does that , it gets a license as an accredited animal to be operational in the field  -  -  just like dogs , by the way .
Maybe one slight difference : we can train rats at a fifth of the price of training the mining dog .
This is our team in Mozambique : one Tanzanian trainer , who transfers the skills to these three Mozambican fellows .
And you should see the pride in the eyes of these people .
They have a skill , which makes them much less dependent on foreign aid .
Moreover , this small team together with , of course , you need the heavy vehicles and the manual de - miners to follow - up .
But with this small investment in a rat capacity , we have demonstrated in Mozambique that we can reduce the cost - price per square meter up to 60 percent of what is currently normal  -  -  two dollars per square meter , we do it at $ 1.18 , and we can still bring that price down .
Question of scale .
If you can bring in more rats , we can actually make the output even bigger .
We have a demonstration site in Mozambique .
Eleven African governments have seen that they can become less dependent by using this technology .
They have signed the pact for peace and treaty in the Great Lakes region , and they endorse hero rats to clear their common borders of landmines .
But let me bring you to a very different problem .
And theres about 6,000 people last year that walked on a landmine , but worldwide last year , almost 1.9 million died from tuberculosis as a first cause of infection .
Especially in Africa where T.B . and HIV are strongly linked , there is a huge common problem .
Microscopy , the standard WHO procedure , reaches from 40 to 60 percent reliability .
In Tanzania  -  -  the numbers dont lie  -  -  45 percent of people  -  -  T.B . patients  -  -  get diagnosed with T.B . before they die .
It means that , if you have T.B . , you have more chance that you wont be detected , but will just die from T.B . secondary infections and so on .
And if , however , you are detected very early , diagnosed early , treatment can start , and even in HIV - positives , it makes sense .
You can actually cure T.B . , even in HIV - positives .
So in our common language , Dutch , the name for T.B .
is  tering ,  which , etymologically , refers to the smell of tar .
Already the old Chinese and the Greek , Hippocrates , have actually published , documented , that T.B . can be diagnosed based on the volatiles exuding from patients .
So what we did is we collected some samples  -  -  just as a way of testing  -  -  from hospitals , trained rats on them and see if this works , and wonder , well , we can reach 89 percent sensitivity , 86 percent specificity using multiple rats in a row .
This is how it works , and really , this is a generic technology .
Were talking now explosives , tuberculosis , but can you imagine , you can actually put anything under there .
So how does it work ?
You have a cassette with 10 samples .
You put these 10 samples at once in the cage .
An animal only needs two hundredths of a second to discriminate the scent , so it goes extremely fast .
Here its already at the third sample .
This is a positive sample .
It gets a click sound and comes for the food reward .
And by doing so , very fast , we can have like a second - line opinion to see which patients are positive , which are negative .
Just as an indication , whereas a microscopist can process 40 samples in a day , a rat can process the same amount of samples in seven minutes only .
A cage like this  -  -  A cage like this  -  -  provided that you have rats , and we have now currently 25 tuberculosis rats  -  -  a cage like this , operating throughout the day , can process 1,680 samples .
Can you imagine the potential offspring applications  -  -  environmental detection of pollutants in soils , customs applications , detection of illicit goods in containers and so on .
But lets stick first to tuberculosis .
I just want to briefly highlight , the blue rods are the scores of microscopy only at the five clinics in Dar es Salaam on a population of 500,000 people , where 15,000 reported to get a test done .
Microscopy for 1,800 patients .
And by just presenting the samples once more to the rats and looping those results back , we were able to increase case detection rates by over 30 percent .
Throughout last year , weve been  -  -  depending on which intervals you take  -  -  weve been consistently increasing case detection rates in five hospitals in Dar es Salaam between 30 and 40 percent .
So this is really considerable .
Knowing that a missed patient by microscopy infects up to 15 people , healthy people , per year , you can be sure that we have saved lots of lives .
At least our hero rats have saved lots of lives .
The way forward for us is now to standardize this technology .
And there are simple things like , for instance , we have a small laser in the sniffer hole where the animal has to stick for five seconds .
So , to standardize this .
Also , to standardize the pellets , the food rewards , and to semi - automate this in order to replicate this on a much larger scale and affect the lives of many more people .
To conclude , there are also other applications at the horizon .
Here is a first prototype of our camera rat , which is a rat with a rat backpack with a camera that can go under rubble to detect for victims after earthquake and so on .
This is in a prototype stage .
We dont have a working system here yet .
To conclude , I would actually like to say , you may think this is about rats , these projects , but in the end it is about people .
It is about empowering vulnerable communities to tackle difficult , expensive and dangerous humanitarian detection tasks , and doing that with a local resource , plenty available .
So something completely different is to keep on challenging your perception about the resources surrounding you , whether they are environmental , technological , animal , or human .
And to respectfully harmonize with them in order to foster a sustainable work .
Thank you very much .
Amy Tan : Where does creativity hide ?
Novelist Amy Tan digs deep into the creative process , looking for hints of how hers evolved .
The Value of Nothing : Out of Nothing Comes Something .
That was an essay I wrote when I was 11 years old and I got a B + .
What Im going to talk about : nothing out of something , and how we create .
And Im gonna try and do that within the 18 - minute time span that we were told to stay within , and to follow the TED commandments : that is , actually , something that creates a near - death experience , but near - death is good for creativity .
OK .
So , I also want to explain , because Dave Eggers said he was going to heckle me if I said anything that was a lie , or not true to universal creativity .
And Ive done it this way for half the audience , who is scientific .
When I say we , I dont mean you , necessarily ; I mean me , and my right brain , my left brain and the one thats in between that is the censor and tells me what Im saying is wrong .
And Im going do that also by looking at what I think is part of my creative process , which includes a number of things that happened , actually  -  -  the nothing started even earlier than the moment in which Im creating something new .
And that includes nature , and nurture , and what I refer to as nightmares .
Now in the nature area , we look at whether or not we are innately equipped with something , perhaps in our brains , some abnormal chromosome that causes this muse - like effect .
And some people would say that were born with it in some other means .
And others , like my mother , would say that I get my material from past lives .
Some people would also say that creativity may be a function of some other neurological quirk  -  -  van Gogh syndrome  -  -  that you have a little bit of , you know , psychosis , or depression .
I do have to say , somebody  -  -  I read recently that van Gogh wasnt really necessarily psychotic , that he might have had temporal lobe seizures , and that might have caused his spurt of creativity , and I dont  -  -  I suppose it does something in some part of your brain .
And I will mention that I actually developed temporal lobe seizures a number of years ago , but it was during the time I was writing my last book , and some people say that book is quite different .
I think that part of it also begins with a sense of identity crisis : you know , who am I , why am I this particular person , why am I not black like everybody else ?
And sometimes youre equipped with skills , but they may not be the kind of skills that enable creativity .
I used to draw . I thought I would be an artist .
And I had a miniature poodle .
And it wasnt bad , but it wasnt really creative .
Because all I could really do was represent in a very one - on - one way .
And I have a sense that I probably copied this from a book .
And then , I also wasnt really shining in a certain area that I wanted to be , and you know , you look at those scores , and it wasnt bad , but it was not certainly predictive that I would one day make my living out of the artful arrangement of words .
Also , one of the principles of creativity is to have a little childhood trauma .
And I had the usual kind that I think a lot of people had , and that is that , you know , I had expectations placed on me .
That figure right there , by the way , figure right there was a toy given to me when I was but nine years old , and it was to help me become a doctor from a very early age .
I have some ones that were long lasting : from the age of five to 15 , this was supposed to be my side occupation , and it led to a sense of failure .
But actually , there was something quite real in my life that happened when I was about 14 .
And it was discovered that my brother , in 1967 , and then my father , six months later , had brain tumors .
And my mother believed that something had gone wrong , and she was gonna find out what it was , and she was gonna fix it .
My father was a Baptist minister , and he believed in miracles , and that Gods will would take care of that .
But , of course , they ended up dying , six months apart .
And after that , my mother believed that it was fate , or curses  -  -  she went looking through all the reasons in the universe why this would have happened .
Everything except randomness . She did not believe in randomness .
There was a reason for everything .
And one of the reasons , she thought , was that her mother , who had died when she was very young , was angry at her .
And so , I had this notion of death all around me , because my mother also believed that I would be next , and she would be next .
And when you are faced with the prospect of death very soon , you begin to think very much about everything .
You become very creative , in a survival sense .
And this , then , led to my big questions .
And theyre the same ones that I have today .
And they are : why do things happen , and how do things happen ?
And the one my mother asked : how do I make things happen ?
Its a wonderful way to look at these questions , when you write a story .
Because , after all , in that framework , between page one and 300 , you have to answer this question of why things happen , how things happen , in what order they happen . What are the influences ?
How do I , as the narrator , as the writer , also influence that ?
And its also one that , I think , many of our scientists have been asking .
Its a kind of cosmology , and I have to develop a cosmology of my own universe , as the creator of that universe .
And you see , theres a lot of back and forth in trying to make that happen , trying to figure it out  -  -  years and years , oftentimes .
So , when I look at creativity , I also think that it is this sense or this inability to repress , my looking at associations in practically anything in life .
And I got a lot of them during whats been going on throughout this conference , almost everything thats been going on .
And so Im going to use , as the metaphor , this association : quantum mechanics , which I really dont understand , but Im still gonna use it as the process for explaining how it is the metaphor .
So , in quantum mechanics , of course , you have dark energy and dark matter .
And its the same thing in looking at these questions of how things happen .
Theres a lot of unknown , and you often dont know what it is except by its absence .
But when you make those associations , you want them to come together in a kind of synergy in the story , and what youre finding is what matters . The meaning .
And thats what I look for in my work , a personal meaning .
There is also the uncertainty principle , which is part of quantum mechanics , as I understand it .
And this happens constantly in the writing .
And theres the terrible and dreaded observer effect , in which youre looking for something , and you know , things are happening simultaneously , and youre looking at it in a different way , and youre trying to really look for the about - ness , or what is this story about . And if you try too hard , then you will only write the about .
You wont discover anything .
And what you were supposed to find , what you hoped to find in some serendipitous way , is no longer there .
Now , I dont want to ignore the other side of what happens in our universe , like many of our scientists have .
And so , I am going to just throw in string theory here , and just say that creative people are multidimensional , and there are 11 levels , I think , of anxiety .
And they all operate at the same time .
There is also a big question of ambiguity .
And I would link that to something called the cosmological constant .
And you dont know what is operating , but something is operating there .
And ambiguity , to me , is very uncomfortable in my life , and I have it . Moral ambiguity .
It is constantly there . And , just as an example , this is one that recently came to me .
It was something I read in an editorial by a woman who was talking about the war in Iraq . And she said ,  Save a man from drowning , you are responsible to him for life . 
A very famous Chinese saying , she said .
And that means because we went into Iraq , we should stay there until things were solved . You know , maybe even 100 years .
So , there was another one that I came across , and its  saving fish from drowning . 
And its what Buddhist fishermen say , because theyre not supposed to kill anything .
And they also have to make a living , and people need to be fed .
So their way of rationalizing that is they are saving the fish from drowning , and unfortunately , in the process the fish die .
Now , whats encapsulated in both these drowning metaphors  -  -  actually , one of them is my mothers interpretation , and it is a famous Chinese saying , because she said it to me :  save a man from drowning , you are responsible to him for life . 
And it was a warning  -  -  dont get involved in other peoples business , or youre going to get stuck .
OK . I think if somebody really was drowning , shed save them .
But , both of these sayings  -  -  saving a fish from drowning , or saving a man from drowning  -  -  to me they had to do with intentions .
And all of us in life , when we see a situation , we have a response .
And then we have intentions .
Theres an ambiguity of what that should be that we should do , and then we do something .
And the results of that may not match what our intentions had been .
Maybe things go wrong . And so , after that , what are our responsibilities ?
What are we supposed to do ?
Do we stay in for life , or do we do something else and justify and say , well , my intentions were good , and therefore I can not be held responsible for all of it ?
That is the ambiguity in my life that really disturbed me , and led me to write a book called  Saving Fish From Drowning . 
I saw examples of that . Once I identified this question , it was all over the place .
I got these hints everywhere .
And then , in a way , I knew that they had always been there .
And then writing , thats what happens . I get these hints , these clues , and I realize that theyve been obvious , and yet they have not been .
And what I need , in effect , is a focus .
And when I have the question , it is a focus .
And all these things that seem to be flotsam and jetsam in life actually go through that question , and what happens is those particular things become relevant .
And it seems like its happening all the time .
You think theres a sort of coincidence going on , a serendipity , in which youre getting all this help from the universe .
And it may also be explained that now you have a focus .
And you are noticing it more often .
But you apply this .
You begin to look at things having to do with your tensions .
Your brother , whos fallen in trouble , do you take care of him ?
Why or why not ?
It may be something that is perhaps more serious  -  -  as I said , human rights in Burma .
I was thinking that I shouldnt go because somebody said , if I did , it would show that I approved of the military regime there .
And then , after a while , I had to ask myself ,  Why do we take on knowledge , why do we take on assumptions that other people have given us ? 
And it was the same thing that I felt when I was growing up , and was hearing these rules of moral conduct from my father , who was a Baptist minister .
So I decided that I would go to Burma for my own intentions , and still didnt know that if I went there , what the result of that would be , if I wrote a book  -  -  and I just would have to face that later , when the time came .
We are all concerned with things that we see in the world that we are aware of .
We come to this point and say , what do I as an individual do ?
Not all of us can go to Africa , or work at hospitals , so what do we do , if we have this moral response , this feeling ?
Also , I think one of the biggest things we are all looking at , and we talked about today , is genocide .
This leads to this question .
When I look at all these things that are morally ambiguous and uncomfortable , and I consider what my intentions should be , I realize it goes back to this identity question that I had when I was a child  -  -  and why am I here , and what is the meaning of my life , and what is my place in the universe ?
It seems so obvious , and yet it is not .
We all hate moral ambiguity in some sense , and yet it is also absolutely necessary .
In writing a story , it is the place where I begin .
Sometimes I get help from the universe , it seems .
My mother would say it was the ghost of my grandmother from the very first book , because it seemed I knew things I was not supposed to know .
Instead of writing that the grandmother died accidentally , from an overdose of opium , while having too much of a good time , I actually put down in the story that the woman killed herself , and that actually was the way it happened .
And my mother decided that that information must have come from my grandmother .
There are also things , quite uncanny , which bring me information that will help me in the writing of the book .
In this case , I was writing a story that included some kind of detail , period of history , a certain location .
And I needed to find something historically that would match that .
And I took down this book , and I  -  -  first page that I flipped it to was exactly the setting , and the time period , and the kind of character I needed  -  -  was the Taiping rebellion , happening in the area near Guilin , outside of that , and a character who thought he was the son of God .
You wonder , are these things random chance ?
Well , what is random ? What is chance ? What is luck ?
What are things that you get from the universe that you cant really explain ?
And that goes into the story , too .
These are the things I constantly think about from day to day .
Especially when good things happen , and , in particular , when bad things happen .
But I do think theres a kind of serendipity , and I do want to know what those elements are , so I can thank them , and also try to find them in my life .
Because , again , I think that when I am aware of them , more of them happen .
Another chance encounter is when I went to a place  -  -  I just was with some friends , and we drove randomly to a different place , and we ended up in this non - tourist location , a beautiful village , pristine .
And we walked three valleys beyond , and the third valley , there was something quite mysterious and ominous , a discomfort I felt . And then I knew that had to be  the  setting of my book .
And in writing one of the scenes , it happened in that third valley .
For some reason I wrote about cairns  -  -  stacks of rocks  -  -  that a man was building .
And I didnt know exactly why I had it , but it was so vivid .
I got stuck , and a friend , when she asked if I would go for a walk with her dogs , that I said , sure . And about 45 minutes later , walking along the beach , I came across this .
And it was a man , a Chinese man , and he was stacking these things , not with glue , not with anything .
And I asked him ,  How is it possible to do this ? 
And he said ,  Well , I guess with everything in life , theres a place of balance . 
And this was exactly the meaning of my story at that point .
I had so many examples  -  -  I have so many instances like this , when Im writing a story , and I can not explain it .
Is it because I had the filter that I have such a strong coincidence in writing about these things ?
Or is it a kind of serendipity that we can not explain , like the cosmological constant ?
A big thing that I also think about is accidents .
And as I said , my mother did not believe in randomness .
What is the nature of accidents ?
And how are we going to assign what the responsibility and the causes are , outside of a court of law ?
I was able to see that in a firsthand way , when I went to beautiful Dong village , in Guizhou , the poorest province of China .
And I saw this beautiful place . I knew I wanted to come back .
And I had a chance to do that , when National Geographic asked me And I said yes , about this village of singing people , singing minority .
And they agreed , and between the time I saw this place and the next time I went , there was a terrible accident . A man , an old man , fell asleep , and his quilt dropped in a pan of fire that kept him warm .
60 homes were destroyed , and 40 were damaged .
Responsibility was assigned to the family .
The mans sons were banished to live three kilometers away , in a cowshed .
And , of course , as Westerners , we say ,  Well , it was an accident . Thats not fair .
Its the son , not the father . 
When I go on a story , I have to let go of those kinds of beliefs .
It takes a while , but I have to let go of them and just go there , and be there .
And so I was there on three occasions , different seasons .
And I began to sense something different about the history , and what had happened before , and the nature of life in a very poor village , and what you find as your joys , and your rituals , your traditions , your links with other families . And I saw how this had a kind of justice , in its responsibility .
I was able to find out also about the ceremony that they were using , a ceremony they hadnt used in about 29 years . And it was to send some men  -  -  a Feng Shui master sent men down to the underworld on ghost horses .
Now you , as Westerners , and I , as Westerners , would say well , thats superstition . But after being there for a while , and seeing the amazing things that happened , you begin to wonder whose beliefs are those that are in operation in the world , determining how things happen .
So I remained with them , and the more I wrote that story , the more I got into those beliefs , and I think thats important for me  -  -  to take on the beliefs , because that is where the story is real , and that is where Im gonna find the answers to how I feel about certain questions that I have in life .
Years go by , of course , and the writing , it doesnt happen instantly , as Im trying to convey it to you here at TED .
The book comes and it goes . When it arrives , it is no longer my book .
It is in the hands of readers , and they interpret it differently .
But I go back to this question of , how do I create something out of nothing ?
And how do I create my own life ?
And I think it is by questioning , and saying to myself that there are no absolute truths .
I believe in specifics , the specifics of story , and the past , the specifics of that past , and what is happening in the story at that point .
I also believe that in thinking about things  -  -  my thinking about luck , and fate , and coincidences and accidents , Gods will , and the synchrony of mysterious forces  -  -  I will come to some notion of what that is , how we create .
I have to think of my role . Where I am in the universe , and did somebody intend for me to be that way , or is it just something I came up with ?
And I also can find that by imagining fully , and becoming what is imagined  -  -  and yet is in that real world , the fictional world .
And that is how I find particles of truth , not the absolute truth , or the whole truth .
And they have to be in all possibilities , including those I never considered before .
So , there are never complete answers .
Or rather , if there is an answer , it is to remind myself that there is uncertainty in everything , and that is good , because then I will discover something new .
And if there is a partial answer , a more complete answer from me , it is to simply imagine .
And to imagine is to put myself in that story , until there was only  -  -  there is a transparency between me and the story that I am creating .
And thats how Ive discovered that if I feel what is in the story  -  -  in one story  -  -  then I come the closest , I think , to knowing what compassion is , to feeling that compassion .
Because for everything , in that question of how things happen , it has to do with the feeling .
I have to become the story in order to understand a lot of that .
Weve come to the end of the talk , and I will reveal what is in the bag , and it is the muse , and it is the things that transform in our lives , that are wonderful and stay with us .
There she is .
Thank you very much !
Andrew Fitzgerald : Adventures in Twitter fiction
In the 1930s , broadcast radio introduced an entirely new form of storytelling ; today , micro - blogging platforms like Twitter are changing the scene again . Andrew Fitzgerald takes a look at the short but fascinating history of new forms of creative experimentation in fiction and storytelling .
So in my free time outside of Twitter I experiment a little bit with telling stories online , experimenting with what we can do with new digital tools .
And in my job at Twitter , I actually spent a little bit of time working with authors and storytellers as well , helping to expand out the bounds of what people are experimenting with .
And I want to talk through some examples today of things that people have done that I think are really fascinating using flexible identity and anonymity on the web and blurring the lines between fact and fiction .
But I want to start and go back to the 1930s .
Long before a little thing called Twitter , radio brought us broadcasts and connected millions of people to single points of broadcast .
And from those single points emanated stories .
Some of them were familiar stories .
Some of them were new stories .
And for a while they were familiar formats , but then radio began to evolve its own unique formats specific to that medium .
Think about episodes that happened live on radio .
Combining the live play and the serialization of written fiction , you get this new format .
And the reason why I bring up radio is that I think radio is a great example of how a new medium defines new formats which then define new stories .
And of course , today , we have an entirely new medium to play with , which is this online world .
This is the map of verified users on Twitter and the connections between them .
There are thousands upon thousands of them .
Every single one of these points is its own broadcaster .
Weve gone to this world of many to many , where access to the tools is the only barrier to broadcasting .
And I think that we should start to see wildly new formats emerge as people learn how to tell stories in this new medium .
I actually believe that we are in a wide open frontier for creative experimentation , if you will , that weve explored and begun to settle this wild land of the Internet and are now just getting ready to start to build structures on it , and those structures are the new formats of storytelling that the Internet will allow us to create .
I believe this starts with an evolution of existing methods .
The short story , for example , people are saying that the short story is experiencing a renaissance of sorts thanks to e - readers , digital marketplaces .
One writer , Hugh Howey , experimented with short stories on Amazon by releasing one very short story called  Wool . 
And he actually says that he didnt intend for  Wool  to become a series , but that the audience loved the first story so much they demanded more , and so he gave them more .
He gave them  Wool 2 ,  which was a little bit longer than the first one ,  Wool 3 ,  which was even longer , culminating in  Wool 5 ,  which was a 60,000 - word novel .
I think Howey was able to do all of this because he had the quick feedback system of e - books .
He was able to write and publish in relatively short order .
There was no mediator between him and the audience .
It was just him directly connected with his audience and building on the feedback and enthusiasm that they were giving him .
So this whole project was an experiment .
It started with the one short story , and I think the experimentation actually became a part of Howeys format .
And thats something that this medium enabled , was experimentation being a part of the format itself .
This is a short story by the author Jennifer Egan called  Black Box . 
It was originally written specifically with Twitter in mind .
Egan convinced The New Yorker to start a New Yorker fiction account from which they could tweet all of these lines that she created .
Now Twitter , of course , has a 140 - character limit .
Egan mocked that up just writing manually in this storyboard sketchbook , used the physical space constraints of those storyboard squares to write each individual tweet , and those tweets ended up becoming over 600 of them that were serialized by The New Yorker .
Every night , at 8 p.m . , you could tune in to a short story from The New Yorkers fiction account .
I think thats pretty exciting : tune - in literary fiction .
The experience of Egans story , of course , like anything on Twitter , there were multiple ways to experience it .
You could scroll back through it , but interestingly , if you were watching it live , there was this suspense that built because the actual tweets , you had no control over when you would read them .
They were coming at a pretty regular clip , but as the story was building , normally , as a reader , you control how fast you move through a text , but in this case , The New Yorker did , and they were sending you bit by bit by bit , and you had this suspense of waiting for the next line .
Another great example of fiction and the short story on Twitter , Elliott Holt is an author who wrote a story called  Evidence . 
It began with this tweet :  On November 28 at 10 : 13 p.m . , a woman identified as Miranda Brown , 44 , of Brooklyn , fell to her death from the roof of a Manhattan hotel . 
It begins in Elliotts voice , but then Elliotts voice recedes , and we hear the voices of Elsa , Margot and Simon , characters that Elliott created on Twitter specifically to tell this story , a story from multiple perspectives leading up to this moment at 10 : 13 p.m .
when this woman falls to her death .
These three characters brought an authentic vision from multiple perspectives .
One reviewer called Elliotts story  Twitter fiction done right ,  because she did .
She captured that voice and she had multiple characters and it happened in real time .
Interestingly , though , it wasnt just Twitter as a distribution mechanism .
It was also Twitter as a production mechanism .
Elliott told me later she wrote the whole thing with her thumbs .
She laid on the couch and just went back and forth between different characters tweeting out each line , line by line .
I think that this kind of spontaneous creation of what was coming out of the characters voices really lent an authenticity to the characters themselves , but also to this format that she had created of multiple perspectives in a single story on Twitter .
As you begin to play with flexible identity online , it gets even more interesting as you start to interact with the real world .
Things like Invisible Obama or the famous  binders full of women  that came up during the 2012 election cycle , or even the fan fiction universe of  West Wing  Twitter in which you have all of these accounts for every single one of the characters in  The West Wing ,  including the bird that taps at Josh Lymans window in one single episode .
All of these are rapid iterations on a theme .
They are creative people experimenting with the bounds of what is possible in this medium .
You look at something like  West Wing  Twitter , in which you have these fictional characters that engage with the real world .
They comment on politics , they cry out against the evils of Congress .
Keep in mind , theyre all Democrats .
And they engage with the real world .
They respond to it .
So once you take flexible identity , anonymity , engagement with the real world , and you move beyond simple homage or parody and you put these tools to work in telling a story , thats when things get really interesting .
So during the Chicago mayoral election there was a parody account .
It was Mayor Emanuel .
It gave you everything you wanted from Rahm Emanuel , particularly in the expletive department .
This foul - mouthed account followed the daily activities of the race , providing commentary as it went .
It followed all of the natural tropes of a good , solid Twitter parody account , but then started to get weird .
And as it progressed , it moved from this commentary to a multi - week , real - time science fiction epic in which your protagonist , Rahm Emanuel , engages in multi - dimensional travel on election day , which is  -  -  it didnt actually happen .
I double checked the newspapers .
And then , very interestingly , it came to an end .
This is something that doesnt usually happen with a Twitter parody account .
It ended , a true narrative conclusion .
And so the author , Dan Sinker , who was a journalist , who was completely anonymous this whole time , I think Dan  -  -  it made a lot of sense for him to turn this into a book , because it was a narrative format in the end , and I think that turning it into a book is representative of this idea that he had created something new that needed to be translated into previous formats .
One of my favorite examples of something thats happening on Twitter right now , actually , is the very absurdist Crimer Show .
Crimer Show tells the story of a supercriminal and a hapless detective that face off in this exceptionally strange lingo , with all of the tropes of a television show .
Crimer Shows creator has said that it is a parody of a popular type of show in the U.K . , but , man , is it weird .
And there are all these times where Crimer , the supercriminal , does all of these TV things .
Hes always taking off his sunglasses or turning to the camera , but these things just happen in text .
I think borrowing all of these tropes from television and additionally presenting each Crimer Show as an episode , spelled E - P - P - A - S - O - D ,  eppasod ,  presenting them as episodes really , it creates something new .
There is a new  eppasod  of Crimer Show on Twitter pretty much every day , and theyre archived that way .
And I think this is an interesting experiment in format .
Something totally new has been created here out of parodying something on television .
I think in nonfiction real - time storytelling , there are a lot of really excellent examples as well .
RealTimeWWII is an account that documents what was happening on this day 60 years ago in exceptional detail , as if you were reading the news reports from that day .
And the author Teju Cole has done a lot of experimentation with putting a literary twist on events of the news .
In this particular case , hes talking about drone strikes .
I think that in both of these examples , youre beginning to see ways in which people are telling stories with nonfiction content that can be built into new types of fictional storytelling .
So with real - time storytelling , blurring the lines between fact and fiction , the real world and the digital world , flexible identity , anonymity , these are all tools that we have accessible to us , and I think that theyre just the building blocks .
They are the bits that we use to create the structures , the frames , that then become our settlements on this wide open frontier for creative experimentation .
Thank you .
Rachelle Garniez :  La Vie en Rose 
Featuring the vocals and mischievous bell - playing of accordionist and singer Rachelle Garniez , the TED House Band  -  -  led by Thomas Dolby on keyboard  -  -  delivers this delightful rendition of the Edith Piaf standard  La Vie en Rose . 
Thomas Dolby : For pure pleasure please welcome the lovely , the delectable , and the bilingual Rachelle Garniez .
Rachelle Garniez : Quand il me prend dans ses bras Il me parle tout bas , Je vois la vie en rose . Il me dit des mots damour , Des mots de tous les jours , Et ca me fait quelque chose . Il est entre dans mon coeur Une part de bonheur Dont je connais la cause . Cest lui pour moi . Moi pour lui Dans la vie , Il me la dit , la jure  pour  la vie . Et des que je lapercois Alors je sens en moi Mon coeur qui bat
Catherine Bracy : Why good hackers make good citizens
Hacking is about more than mischief - making or political subversion . As Catherine Bracy describes in this spirited talk , it can be just as much a force for good as it is for evil . She spins through some inspiring civically - minded projects in Honolulu , Oakland and Mexico City — and makes a compelling case that we all have what it takes to get involved .
Im going to talk about hackers .
And the image that comes to your mind when I say that word is probably not of Benjamin Franklin , but Im going to explain to you why it should be .
The image that comes to your mind is probably more likely of a pasty kid sitting in a basement doing something mischievous , or of a shady criminal who is trying to steal your identity , or of an international rogue with a political agenda .
And mainstream culture has kind of fed this idea that hackers are people that we should be afraid of .
But like most things in technology and the technology world , hacking has equal power for good as it has for evil .
For every hacker thats trying to steal your identity theres one thats building a tool that will help you find your loved ones after a disaster or to monitor environmental quality after an oil spill .
Hacking is really just any amateur innovation on an existing system , and it is a deeply democratic activity .
Its about critical thinking .
Its about questioning existing ways of doing things .
Its the idea that if you see a problem , you work to fix it , and not just complain about it .
And in many ways , hacking is what built America .
Betsy Ross was a hacker .
The Underground Railroad was a brilliant hack .
And from the Wright brothers to Steve Jobs , hacking has always been at the foundation of American democracy .
So if theres one thing I want to leave you here with today , its that the next time you think about who a hacker is , you think not of this guy but of this guy , Benjamin Franklin , who was one of the greatest hackers of all time .
He was one of Americas most prolific inventors , though he famously never filed a patent , because he thought that all human knowledge should be freely available .
He brought us bifocals and the lightning rod , and of course there was his collaboration on the invention of American democracy .
And in Code For America , we really try to embody the spirit of Ben Franklin .
He was a tinkerer and a statesman whose conception of citizenship was always predicated on action .
He believed that government could be built by the people , and we call those people civic hackers .
So its no wonder that the values that underly a healthy democracy , like collaboration and empowerment and participation and enterprise , are the same values that underly the Internet .
And so its no surprise that many hackers are turning their attention to the problem of government .
But before I give you a few examples of what civic hacking looks like , I want to make clear that you dont have to be a programmer to be a civic hacker .
You just have to believe that you can bring a 21st - century tool set to bear on the problems that government faces .
And we hear all the time from our community of civic hackers at Code for America that they didnt understand how much nontechnical work actually went into civic hacking projects .
So keep that in mind .
All of you are potential civic hackers .
So what does civic hacking look like ?
Our team last year in Honolulu , which in this case was three full - time fellows who were doing a year of public service , were asked by the city to rebuild the website .
And its a massive thing of tens of thousands of pages which just wasnt going to be possible in the few months that they had .
So instead , they decided to build a parallel site that better conformed to how citizens actually want to interact with information on a city website .
Theyre looking for answers to questions , and they want to take action when theyre done , which is really hard to do from a site that looks like this .
So our team built Honolulu Answers , which is a super - simple search interface where you enter a search term or a question and get back plain language answers that drive a user towards action .
Now the site itself was easy enough to build , but the team was faced with the challenge of how they populate all of the content .
It would have taken the three of them a very long time , especially given that none of them are actually from Honolulu .
And so they did something thats really radical , when you think about how government is used to working .
They asked citizens to write the content .
So youve heard of a hack - a - thon .
They held a write - a - thon , where on one Saturday afternoon  -  -  — Wild pigs are a huge problem in Honolulu , apparently .
In one Saturday afternoon , they were able to populate most of the content for most of the frequently asked questions , but more importantly than that , they created a new way for citizens to participate in their government .
Now , I think this is a really cool story in and of itself , but it gets more awesome .
On the National Day of Civic Hacking this past June in Oakland , where I live , the Code For America team in Oakland took the open source code base of Honolulu Answers and turned it into Oakland Answers , and again we held a write - a - thon where we took the most frequently asked questions and had citizens write the answers to them , and I got into the act .
I authored this answer , and a few others .
And Im trying to this day to articulate the sense of empowerment and responsibility that I feel for the place that I live based simply on this small act of participation .
And by stitching together my small act with the thousands of other small acts of participation that were enabling through civic hacking , we think we can reenergize citizenship and restore trust in government .
At this point , you may be wondering what city officials think of all this .
They actually love it .
As most of you guys know , cities are being asked every day to do more with less , and theyre always looking for innovative solutions to entrenched problems .
So when you give citizens a way to participate beyond attending a town hall meeting , cities can actually capture the capacity in their communities to do the business of government .
Now I dont want to leave the impression that civic hacking is just an American phenomenon .
Its happening across the globe , and one of my favorite examples is from Mexico City , where earlier this year , the Mexico House of Representatives entered into a contract with a software development firm to build an app that legislators would use to track bills .
So this was just for the handful of legislators in the House .
And the contract was a two - year contract for 9.3 million dollars .
Now a lot of people were really angry about this , especially geeks who knew that 9.3 million dollars was an absolutely outrageous amount of money for what was a very simple app .
But instead of taking to the streets , they issued a challenge .
They asked programmers in Mexico to build something better and cheaper , and they offered a prize of 9,300 dollars  -  -  10,000 times cheaper than the government contract , and they gave the entrants 10 days .
And in those 10 days , they submitted 173 apps , five of which were presented to Congress and are still in the app store today .
And because of this action , that contract was vacated , and now this has sparked a movement in Mexico City which is home to one of our partners , Code for Mexico City .
And so what you see in all three of these places , in Honolulu and in Oakland and in Mexico City , are the elements that are at the core of civic hacking .
Its citizens who saw things that could be working better and they decided to fix them , and through that work , theyre creating a 21st - century ecosystem of participation .
Theyre creating a whole new set of ways for citizens to be involved , besides voting or signing a petition or protesting .
They can actually build government .
So back to our friend Ben Franklin , who , one of his lesser - known accomplishments was that in 1736 he founded the first volunteer firefighting company in Philadelphia , called a brigade .
And its because he and his friends noticed that the city was having trouble keeping up with all the fires that were happening in the city , so in true civic hacker fashion , they built a solution .
And we have our own brigades at Code for America working on the projects that Ive just described , and we want to ask you to follow in Ben Franklins footsteps and come join us .
We have 31 brigades in the U.S .
We are pleased to announce today that were opening up the brigade to international cities for the first time , starting with cities in Poland and Japan and Ireland .
You can find out if theres a brigade where you live at brigade . codeforamerica . org , and if theres not a brigade where you live , we will help you .
Weve created a tool kit which also lives at brigade . codeforamerica . org , and we will support you along the way .
Our goal is to create a global network of civic hackers who are innovating on the existing system in order to build tools that will solve entrenched problems , that will support local government , and that will empower citizens .
So please come hack with us .
Thank you .
Ananda Shankar Jayant : Fighting cancer with dance
Renowned classical Indian dancer Ananda Shankar Jayant was diagnosed with cancer in 2008 . She tells her personal story of not only facing the disease but dancing through it , and gives a performance revealing the metaphor of strength that helped her do it .
 Sanskrit  This is an ode to the mother goddess , that most of us in India learn when we are children .
I learned it when I was four at my mothers knee .
That year she introduced me to dance , and thus began my tryst with classical dance .
Since then  -  -  its been four decades now  -  -  Ive trained with the best in the field , performed across the globe , taught young and old alike , created , collaborated , choreographed , and wove a rich tapestry of artistry , achievement and awards .
The crowning glory was in 2007 , when I received this countrys fourth highest civilian award , the Padma Shri , for my contribution to art .
But nothing , nothing prepared me for what I was to hear on the first of July 2008 .
I heard the word  carcinoma . 
Yes , breast cancer .
As I sat dumbstruck in my doctors office , I heard other words :  cancer ,   stage ,   grade . 
Until then , Cancer was the zodiac sign of my friend , stage was what I performed on , and grades were what I got in school .
That day , I realized I had an unwelcome , uninvited , new life partner .
As a dancer , I know the nine rasas or the navarasas : anger , valor , disgust , humor and fear .
I thought I knew what fear was .
That day , I learned what fear was .
Overcome with the enormity of it all and the complete feeling of loss of control , I shed copious tears and asked my dear husband , Jayant .
I said ,  Is this it ? Is this the end of the road ?
Is this the end of my dance ? 
And he , the positive soul that he is , said ,  No , this is just a hiatus , a hiatus during the treatment , and youll get back to doing what you do best . 
I realized then that I , who thought I had complete control of my life , had control of only three things : My thought , my mind  -  -  the images that these thoughts created  -  -  and the action that derived from it .
So here I was wallowing in a vortex of emotions and depression and what have you , with the enormity of the situation , wanting to go to a place of healing , health and happiness .
I wanted to go from where I was to where I wanted to be , for which I needed something .
I needed something that would pull me out of all this .
So I dried my tears , and I declared to the world at large ...
I said ,  Cancers only one page in my life , and I will not allow this page to impact the rest of my life . 
I also declared to the world at large that I would ride it out , and I would not allow cancer to ride me .
But to go from where I was to where I wanted to be , I needed something .
I needed an anchor , an image , a peg to peg this process on , so that I could go from there .
And I found that in my dance , my dance , my strength , my energy , my passion , my very life breath .
But it wasnt easy .
Believe me , it definitely wasnt easy .
How do you keep cheer when you go from beautiful to bald in three days ?
How do you not despair when , with the body ravaged by chemotherapy , climbing a mere flight of stairs was sheer torture , that to someone like me who could dance for three hours ?
How do you not get overwhelmed by the despair and the misery of it all ?
All I wanted to do was curl up and weep .
But I kept telling myself fear and tears are options I did not have .
So I would drag myself into my dance studio  -  -  body , mind and spirit  -  -  every day into my dance studio , and learn everything I learned when I was four , all over again , reworked , relearned , regrouped .
It was excruciatingly painful , but I did it .
Difficult .
I focused on my mudras , on the imagery of my dance , on the poetry and the metaphor and the philosophy of the dance itself .
And slowly , I moved out of that miserable state of mind .
But I needed something else .
I needed something to go that extra mile , and I found it in that metaphor which I had learned from my mother when I was four .
The metaphor of Mahishasura Mardhini , of Durga .
Durga , the mother goddess , the fearless one , created by the pantheon of Hindu gods .
Durga , resplendent , bedecked , beautiful , her 18 arms ready for warfare , as she rode astride her lion into the battlefield to destroy Mahishasur .
Durga , the epitome of creative feminine energy , or shakti .
Durga , the fearless one .
I made that image of Durga and her every attribute , her every nuance , my very own .
Powered by the symbology of a myth and the passion of my training , I brought laser - sharp focus into my dance , laser - sharp focus to such an extent that I danced a few weeks after surgery .
I danced through chemo and radiation cycles , much to the dismay of my oncologist .
I danced between chemo and radiation cycles and badgered him to fit it to my performing dance schedule .
What I had done is I had tuned out of cancer and tuned into my dance .
Yes , cancer has just been one page in my life .
My story is a story of overcoming setbacks , obstacles and challenges that life throws at you .
My story is the power of thought .
My story is the power of choice .
Its the power of focus .
Its the power of bringing ourselves to the attention of something that so animates you , so moves you , that something even like cancer becomes insignificant .
My story is the power of a metaphor .
Its the power of an image .
Mine was that of Durga , Durga the fearless one .
She was also called Simhanandini , the one who rode the lion .
As I ride out , as I ride my own inner strength , my own inner resilience , armed as I am with what medication can provide and continue treatment , as I ride out into the battlefield of cancer , asking my rogue cells to behave , I want to be known not as a cancer survivor , but as a cancer conqueror .
I present to you an excerpt of that work  Simhanandini . 
Thomas Dolby :  Love Is a Loaded Pistol 
To write his first studio album in decades ,  A Map of the Floating City ,  Thomas Dolby has been working in the inspirational setting of a restored lifeboat . At TED2010 he premieres a gorgeous , evocative song from that album  -  -  about one night with a legend . Hes backed by members of the modern string quartet Ethel .
Ive been playing TED for nearly a decade , and Ive very rarely played any new songs of my own .
And that was largely because there werent any .
So Ive been busy with a couple of projects , and one of them was this : The Nutmeg .
A 1930s ships lifeboat , which Ive been restoring in the garden of my beach house in England .
And , so now , when the polar ice caps melt , my recording studio will rise up like an ark , and Ill float off into the drowned world like a character from a J.G . Ballard novel .
During the day , the Nutmeg collects energy from solar panels on the roof of the wheelhouse , and from a 450 watt turbine up the mast .
So that when it gets dark , Ive got plenty of power .
And I can light up the Nutmeg like a beacon .
And so I go in there until the early hours of the morning , and I work on new songs .
Id like to play to you guys , if youre willing to be the first audience to hear it .
Its about Billie Holiday .
And it appears that , some night in 1947 she left her physical space and was missing all night , until she reappeared in the morning .
But I know where she was .
She was with me on my lifeboat .
And she was hot .
Billie crept softly into my waking arms warm like a sip of sour mash Strange fruit for a sweet hunk of trash Panic at the stage door of Carnegie Hall  Famous Jazz Singer Gone AWOL  Must have left the building body and soul On a creaky piano stool tonight as the moon is my only witness She was breathing in my ear  This time its love  But love is a loaded pistol By daybreak shes gone Over the frozen river , home Me and Johnny Walker See in the new age alone Stay with me again tonight Billie , time , time is a wily trickster Still an echo in my heart says ,  This time its love 
Jeremy Gilley : One day of peace
Heres a crazy idea : Persuade the world to try living in peace for just one day , every September 21 . In this energetic , honest talk , Jeremy Gilley tells the story of how this crazy idea became real  -  -  real enough to help millions of kids in war - torn regions .
I was basically concerned about what was going on in the world .
I couldnt understand the starvation , the destruction , the killing of innocent people .
Making sense of those things is a very difficult thing to do .
And when I was 12 , I became an actor .
I was bottom of the class . I havent got any qualifications .
I was told I was dyslexic .
In fact , I have got qualifications .
I got a D in pottery , which was the one thing that I did get  -  -  which was useful , obviously .
And so concern is where all of this comes from .
And then , being an actor , I was doing these different kinds of things , and I felt the content of the work that I was involved in really wasnt cutting it , that there surely had to be more .
And at that point , I read a book by Frank Barnaby , this wonderful nuclear physicist , and he said that media had a responsibility , that all sectors of society had a responsibility to try and progress things and move things forward .
And that fascinated me , because Id been messing around with a camera most of my life .
And then I thought , well maybe I could do something .
Maybe I could become a filmmaker .
Maybe I can use the form of film constructively to in some way make a difference .
Maybe theres a little change I can get involved in .
So I started thinking about peace , and I was obviously , as I said to you , very much moved by these images , trying to make sense of that .
Could I go and speak to older and wiser people who would tell me how they made sense of the things that are going on ?
Because its obviously incredibly frightening .
But I realized that , having been messing around with structure as an actor , that a series of sound bites in itself wasnt enough , that there needed to be a mountain to climb , there needed to be a journey that I had to take .
And if I took that journey , no matter whether it failed or succeeded , it would be completely irrelevant .
The point was that I would have something to hook the questions of  -  -  is humankind fundamentally evil ?
Is the destruction of the world inevitable ? Should I have children ?
Is that a responsible thing to do ? Etc . , etc .
So I was thinking about peace , and then I was thinking , well wheres the starting point for peace ?
And that was when I had the idea .
There was no starting point for peace .
There was no day of global unity .
There was no day of intercultural cooperation .
There was no day when humanity came together , separate in all of those things and just shared it together  -  -  that were in this together , and that if we united and we interculturally cooperated , then that might be the key to humanitys survival .
That might shift the level of consciousness around the fundamental issues that humanity faces  -  -  if we did it just for a day .
So obviously we didnt have any money .
I was living at my moms place .
And we started writing letters to everybody .
You very quickly work out what is it that youve got to do to fathom that out .
How do you create a day voted by every single head of state in the world to create the first ever Ceasefire Nonviolence Day , the 21st of September ?
And I wanted it to be the 21st of September because it was my granddads favorite number .
He was a prisoner of war .
He saw the bomb go off at Nagasaki .
It poisoned his blood . He died when I was 11 .
So he was like my hero .
And the reason why 21 was the number is 700 men left , 23 came back , two died on the boat and 21 hit the ground .
And thats why we wanted it to be the 21st of September as the date of peace .
So we began this journey , and we launched it in 1999 .
And we wrote to heads of state , their ambassadors , Nobel Peace laureates , NGOs , faiths , various organizations  -  -  literally wrote to everybody .
And very quickly , some letters started coming back .
And we started to build this case .
And I remember the first letter .
One of the first letters was from the Dalai Lama .
And of course we didnt have the money ; we were playing guitars and getting the money for the stamps that we were sending out all of  this mail  .
A letter came through from the Dalai Lama saying ,  This is an amazing thing . Come and see me .
Id love to talk to you about the first ever day of peace . 
And we didnt have money for the flight .
And I rang Sir Bob Ayling , who was CEO of BA at the time , and said ,  Mate , weve got this invitation .
Could you give me a flight ? Because were going to go see him . 
And of course , we went and saw him and it was amazing .
And then Dr . Oscar Arias came forward .
And actually , let me go back to that slide , because when we launched it in 1999  -  -  this idea to create the first ever day of ceasefire and non - violence  -  -  we invited thousands of people .
Well not thousands  -  -  hundreds of people , lots of people  -  -  all the press , because we were going to try and create the first ever World Peace Day , a peace day .
And we invited everybody , and no press showed up .
There were 114 people there  -  -  they were mostly my friends and family .
And that was kind of like the launch of this thing .
But it didnt matter because we were documenting , and that was the thing .
For me , it was really about the process .
It wasnt about the end result .
And thats the beautiful thing about the camera .
They used to say the pen is mightier than the sword . I think the camera is .
And just staying in the moment with it was a beautiful thing and really empowering actually .
So anyway , we began the journey .
And here you see people like Mary Robinson , I went to see in Geneva .
Im cutting my hair , its getting short and long , because every time I saw Kofi Annan , I was so worried that he thought I was a hippie that I cut it , and that was kind of what was going on .
Yeah , Im not worried about it now .
So Mary Robinson , she said to me ,  Listen , this is an idea whose time has come . This must be created . 
Kofi Annan said ,  This will be beneficial to my troops on the ground . 
The OAU at the time , led by Salim Ahmed Salim , said ,  I must get the African countries involved . 
Dr . Oscar Arias , Nobel Peace laureate , president now of Costa Rica , said ,  Ill do everything that I can . 
So I went and saw Amr Moussa at the League of Arab States .
I met Mandela at the Arusha peace talks , and so on and so on and so on  -  -  while I was building the case to prove whether this idea would make sense .
And then we were listening to the people . We were documenting everywhere .
76 countries in the last 12 years , Ive visited .
And Ive always spoken to women and children wherever Ive gone .
Ive recorded 44,000 young people .
Ive recorded about 900 hours of their thoughts .
Im really clear about how young people feel when you talk to them about this idea of having a starting point for their actions for a more peaceful world through their poetry , their art , their literature , their music , their sport , whatever it might be .
And we were listening to everybody .
And it was an incredibly thing , working with the U.N .
and working with NGOs and building this case .
I felt that I was presenting a case on behalf of the global community to try and create this day .
And the stronger the case and the more detailed it was , the better chance we had of creating this day .
And it was this stuff , this , where I actually was in the beginning kind of thinking no matter what happened , it didnt actually matter .
It didnt matter if it didnt create a day of peace .
The fact is that , if I tried and it didnt work , then I could make a statement about how unwilling the global community is to unite  -  -  until , it was in Somalia , picking up that young girl .
And this young child whod taken about an inch and a half out of her leg with no antiseptic , and that young boy who was a child soldier , who told me hed killed people  -  -  he was about 12  -  -  these things made me realize that this was not a film that I could just stop .
And that actually , at that moment something happened to me , which obviously made me go ,  Im going to document .
If this is the only film that I ever make , Im going to document until this becomes a reality . 
Because weve got to stop , weve got to do something where we unite  -  -  separate from all the politics and religion that , as a young person , is confusing me .
I dont know how to get involved in that process .
And then on the seventh of September , I was invited to New York .
The Costa Rican government and the British government had put forward to the United Nations General Assembly , with 54 co - sponsors , the idea of the first ever Ceasefire Nonviolence Day , the 21st of September , as a fixed calendar date , and it was unanimously adopted by every head of state in the world .
Yeah , but there were hundreds of individuals , obviously , who made that a reality .
And thank you to all of them .
That was an incredible moment .
I was at the top of the General Assembly just looking down into it and seeing it happen .
And as I mentioned , when it started , we were at the Globe , and there was no press .
And now I was thinking ,  Well , the press it really going to hear this story . 
And suddenly , we started to institutionalize this day .
Kofi Annan invited me on the morning of September the 11th to do a press conference .
And it was 8 : 00 AM when I stood there .
And I was waiting for him to come down , and I knew that he was on his way .
And obviously he never came down . The statement was never made .
The world was never told there was a day of global ceasefire and nonviolence .
And it was obviously a tragic moment for the thousands of people who lost their lives , there and then subsequently all over the world .
It never happened .
And I remember thinking ,  This is exactly why , actually , we have to work even harder .
And we have to make this day work .
Its been created ; nobody knows .
But we have to continue this journey , and we have to tell people , and we have to prove it can work . 
And I left New York freaked , but actually empowered .
And I felt inspired by the possibilities that if it did , then maybe we wouldnt see things like that .
I remember putting that film out and going to cynics .
I was showing the film , and I remember being in Israel and getting it absolutely slaughtered by some guys having watched the film  -  -  that its just a day of peace , it doesnt mean anything .
Its not going to work ; youre not going to stop the fighting in Afghanistan ; the Taliban wont listen , etc . , etc .
Its just symbolism .
And that was even worse than actually what had just happened in many ways , because it couldnt not work .
Id spoken in Somalia , Burundi , Gaza , the West Bank , India , Sri Lanka , Congo , wherever it was , and theyd all tell me ,  If you can create a window of opportunity , we can move aid , we can vaccinate children .
Children can lead their projects .
They can unite . They can come together . If people would stop , lives will be saved . 
Thats what Id heard .
And Id heard that from the people who really understood what conflict was about .
And so I went back to the United Nations .
I decided that Id continue filming and make another movie .
And I went back to the U.N . for another couple of years .
We started moving around the corridors of the U.N . system , governments and NGOs , trying desperately to find somebody to come forward and have a go at it , see if we could make it possible .
And after lots and lots of meetings obviously , Im delighted that this man , Ahmad Fawzi , one of my heroes and mentors really , he managed to get UNICEF involved .
And UNICEF , God bless them , they said ,  Okay , well have a go . 
And then UNAMA became involved in Afghanistan .
It was historical . Could it work in Afghanistan with UNAMA and WHO and civil society , etc . , etc . , etc . ?
And I was getting it all on film and I was recording it , and I was thinking ,  This is it . This is the possibility of it maybe working .
But even if it doesnt , at least the door is open and theres a chance . 
And so I went back to London , and I went and saw this chap , Jude Law .
And I saw him because he was an actor , I was an actor , I had a connection to him , because we needed to get to the press , we needed this attraction , we needed the media to be involved .
Because if we start pumping it up a bit maybe more people would listen and thered be more  -  -  when we got into certain areas , maybe there would be more people interested .
And maybe wed be helped financially a little bit more , which had been desperately difficult .
I wont go into that .
So Jude said ,  Okay , Ill do some statements for you . 
While I was filming these statements , he said to me ,  Where are you going next ? 
I said ,  Im going to go to Afghanistan .  He said ,  Really ? 
And I could sort of see a little look in his eye of interest .
So I said to him ,  Do you want to come with me ?
Itd be really interesting if you came .
It would help and bring attention .
And that attention would help leverage the situation , as well as all of the other sides of it . 
I think theres a number of pillars to success .
One is youve got to have a great idea .
The other is youve got to have a constituency , youve got to have finance , and youve got to be able to raise awareness .
And actually I could never raise awareness by myself , no matter what Id achieved .
So these guys were absolutely crucial .
So he said yes , and we found ourselves in Afghanistan .
It was a really incredible thing that when we landed there , I was talking to various people , and they were saying to me ,  Youve got to get everybody involved here .
You cant just expect it to work . You have to get out and work . 
And we did , and we traveled around , and we spoke to elders , we spoke to doctors , we spoke to nurses , we held press conferences , we went out with soldiers , we sat down with ISAF , we sat down with NATO , we sat down with the U.K . government .
I mean , we basically sat down with everybody  -  -  in and out of schools with ministers of education , holding these press conferences , which of course , now were loaded with press , everybody was there .
There was an interest in what was going on .
This amazing woman , Fatima Gailani , was absolutely instrumental in what went on as she was the spokesperson for the resistance against the Russians .
And her Afghan network was just absolutely everywhere .
And she was really crucial in getting the message in .
And then we went home . Wed sort of done it .
We had to wait now and see what happened .
And I got home , and I remember one of the team bringing in a letter to me from the Taliban .
And that letter basically said ,  Well observe this day .
We will observe this day .
We see it as a window of opportunity .
And we will not engage . Were not going to engage . 
And that meant that humanitarian workers wouldnt be kidnapped or killed .
And then suddenly , I obviously knew at this point , there was a chance .
And days later , 1.6 million children were vaccinated against polio as a consequence of everybody stopping .
And like the General Assembly , obviously the most wonderful , wonderful moment .
And so then we wrapped the film up and we put it together because we had to go back .
We put it into Dari and Pashto . We put it in the local dialects .
We went back to Afghanistan , because the next year was coming , and we wanted to support .
But more importantly , we wanted to go back , because these people in Afghanistan were the heroes .
They were the people who believed in peace and the possibilities of it , etc . , etc .  -  -  and they made it real .
And we wanted to go back and show them the film and say ,  Look , you guys made this possible . And thank you very much . 
And we gave the film over .
Obviously it was shown , and it was amazing .
And then that year , that year , 2008 , this ISAF statement from Kabul , Afghanistan , September 17th :  General Stanley McChrystal , commander of international security assistance forces in Afghanistan , announced today ISAF will not conduct offensive military operations on the 21st of September . 
They were saying they would stop .
And then there was this other statement that came out from the U.N . Department of Security and Safety saying that , in Afghanistan , because of this work , the violence was down by 70 percent .
70 percent reduction in violence on this day at least .
And that completely blew my mind almost more than anything .
And I remember being stuck in New York , this time because of the volcano , which was obviously much less harmful .
And I was there thinking about what was going on .
And I kept thinking about this 70 percent .
70 percent reduction in violence  -  -  in what everyone said was completely impossible and you couldnt do .
And that made me think that , if we can get 70 percent in Afghanistan , then surely we can get 70 percent reduction everywhere .
We have to go for a global truce .
We have to utilize this day of ceasefire and nonviolence and go for a global truce , go for the largest recorded cessation of hostilities , both domestically and internationally , ever recorded .
Thats exactly what we must do .
And on the 21st of September this year , were going to launch that campaign at the O2 Arena to go for that process , to try and create the largest recorded cessation of hostilities .
And we will utilize all kinds of things  -  -  have a dance and social media and visiting on Facebook and visit the website , sign the petition .
And its in the six official languages of the United Nations .
And well globally link with government , inter - government , non - government , education , unions , sports .
And you can see the education box there .
Weve got resources at the moment in 174 countries trying to get young people to be the driving force behind the vision of that global truce .
And obviously the life - saving is increased , the concepts help .
Linking up with the Olympics  -  -  I went and saw Seb Coe . I said ,  London 2012 is about truce .
Ultimately , thats what its about . 
Why dont we all team up ? Why dont we bring truce to life ?
Why dont you support the process of the largest ever global truce ?
Well make a new film about this process .
Well utilize sport and football .
On the Day of Peace , theres thousands of football matches all played , from the favelas of Brazil to wherever it might be .
So , utilizing all of these ways to inspire individual action .
And ultimately , we have to try that .
We have to work together .
And when I stand here in front of all of you , and the people who will watch these things , Im excited , on behalf of everybody Ive met , that there is a possibility that our world could unite , that we could come together as one , that we could lift the level of consciousness around the fundamental issues , brought about by individuals .
I was with Brahimi , Ambassador Brahimi .
I think hes one of the most incredible men in relation to international politics  -  -  in Afghanistan , in Iraq .
Hes an amazing man .
And I sat with him a few weeks ago .
And I said to him ,  Mr. Brahimi , is this nuts , going for a global truce ?
Is this possible ? Is it really possible that we could do this ? 
He said ,  Its absolutely possible . 
I said ,  What would you do ?
Would you go to governments and lobby and use the system ? 
He said ,  No , Id talk to the individuals . 
Its all about the individuals .
Its all about you and me .
Its all about partnerships .
Its about your constituencies ; its about your businesses .
Because together , by working together , I seriously think we can start to change things .
And theres a wonderful man sitting in this audience , and I dont know where he is , who said to me a few days ago  -  -  because I did a little rehearsal  -  -  and he said ,  Ive been thinking about this day and imagining it as a square with 365 squares , and one of them is white . 
And it then made me think about a glass of water , which is clear .
If you put one drop , one drop of something , in that water , itll change it forever .
By working together , we can create peace one day .
Thank you TED . Thank you .
Thank you .
Thanks a lot .
Thank you very much . Thank you .
Norman Spack : How I help transgender teens become who they want to be
Puberty is an awkward time for just about everybody , but for transgender teens it can be a nightmare , as they grow overnight into bodies they arent comfortable with . In a heartfelt talk , endocrinologist Norman Spack tells a personal story of how he became one of the few doctors in the US to treat minors with hormone replacement therapy . By staving off the effects of puberty , Spack gives trans teens the time they need .
I want you all to think about the third word that was ever said about you , or if you were delivering , about the person you were delivering .
And you can all mouth it if you want or say it out loud .
It was , the first two were ,  Its a ... 
Well , it shows you that I also deal with issues where theres not certainty of whether its a girl or a boy , so the mixed answer was very appropriate .
Of course , now the answer often comes not at birth but at the ultrasound , unless the prospective parents choose to be surprised like we all were .
But I want you to think about what it is that leads to that statement on the third word , because the third word is a description of your sex , and by that I mean , made by a description of your genitals .
Now , as a pediatric endocrinologist , I used to be very , very involved , and still somewhat am , in cases in which there are mismatches in the externals or between the externals and the internals , and we literally have to figure out what is the description of your sex .
But there is nothing that is definable at the time of birth that would define you , and when I talk about definition , Im talking about your sexual orientation .
We dont say ,  Its a gay boy . 
 A lesbian girl . 
Those situations dont really define themselves more until the second decade of life .
Nor do they define your gender , which , as different from your anatomic sex , describes your self - concept .
Do you see yourself as a male or female or somewhere in the spectrum in between ?
That sometimes shows up in the first decade of life , but it can be very confusing for parents because it is quite normative for children to act in a cross - gender play and way , and that in fact there are studies that show that even 80 percent of children who act in that fashion will not persist in wanting to be the opposite gender at the time when puberty begins .
But at the time that puberty begins , that means between about age 10 to 12 in girls , 12 to 14 in boys , with breast budding or two to three times increase in the gonads in the case of genetic males , by that particular point , the child who says they are in the absolute wrong body is almost certain to be transgender and is extremely unlikely to change those feelings , no matter how anybody tries reparative therapy or any other noxious things .
Now this is relatively rare , so I had relatively little personal experience with this , and my experience was more typical only because I had an adolescent practice .
And I saw someone age 24 , went through Harvard , genetically female , went through Harvard with three male roommates who knew the whole story , a registrar who always listed his name on course lists as a male name , and came to me after graduating saying ,  Help me .
I know you know a lot of endocrinology . 
And indeed Ive treated a lot of people who were born without gonads .
This wasnt rocket science .
But I made a deal with him : Ill treat you if you teach me .
And so he did .
And what an education I got from taking care of all the members of his support group .
And then I got really confused , because I thought it was relatively easy at that age to just give people the hormones of the gender in which they were affirming , but then my patient married , and he married a woman who had been born as a male , had married as a male , had two children , then went through a transition into female , and now this delightful female was attached to my male patient , in fact got legally married because they showed up as a man and a woman , and who knew ?
Right ?
And while I was confused about , does this make so - and - so gay ?
Does this make so - and - so straight ?
I was getting sexual orientation confused with gender identity .
And my patient said to me ,  Look , look , look .
If you just think of the following , youll get it right : Sexual orientation is who you go to bed with ; gender identity is who you go to bed as . 
And I subsequently learned from the many adults  -  -  I took care of about 200 adults — I learned from them that if I didnt look , peek as to who their partner was in the waiting room , I would never be able to guess better than chance whether they were gay , straight , bi , or asexual in their affirmed gender .
In other words , one thing has absolutely nothing to do with the other .
And the data show it .
Now , as I took care of the 200 adults , I found it extremely painful .
These people were  -  -  many of them had to give up so much of their lives .
Sometimes their parents would reject them , siblings , their own children , and then their divorcing spouse would forbid them from seeing their children .
It was so awful , but why did they do it at 40 and 50 ?
Because they felt they had to affirm themselves before they would kill themselves .
And indeed , the rate of suicide among untreated transgendered people is among the highest in the world .
So what to do ?
I was intrigued in going to a conference in Holland , where they are experts in this , and saw the most remarkable thing .
They were treating young adolescents after giving them the most intense psychometric testing of gender , and they were treating them by blocking the puberty that they didnt want .
Because basically , kids look about the same , each sex , until they go through puberty , at which point , if you feel youre in the wrong sex , you feel like Pinocchio becoming a donkey .
The fantasy that you had that your body will change to be who you want it to be with puberty actually is nullified by the puberty you get .
And they fall apart .
So thats why putting the puberty on hold — Why on hold ? You cant just give them the opposite hormones that young .
Theyll end up stunted in growth , and you think you can have a meaningful conversation about the fertility effects of such treatment with a 10 - year - old girl , a 12 - year - old boy ?
So this buys time in the diagnostic process for four or five years so that they can work it out , they can have more and more testing , they can live without feeling their bodies are running away from them .
And then , in a program they call 12 - 16 - 18 , around age 12 is when they give the blocking hormones , and then at age 16 with retesting , they requalify .
Now remember , the blocking hormones are reversible , but when you give the hormones of the opposite sex , you now start spouting breasts and facial hair and voice , depending on what youre using , and those effects are permanent or require surgery to remove or electrolysis , and you can never really affect the voice .
So this is serious , and this is 15 -  , 16 - year - old stuff .
And then at 18 , theyre eligible for surgery , and while theres no good surgery for females to males genitally , the male - to - female surgery has fooled gynecologists .
Thats how good it can be .
So I looked at how the patients were doing , and I looked at patients who just looked like everybody else , except they were pubertally delayed .
But once they gave them the hormones consistent with the gender they affirm , they look beautiful .
They look normal . They had normal heights .
in a crowd .
So at that point , I decided Im going to do this .
This is really where the pediatric endocrine realm comes in , in kids age 10 - 12 , 10 - 14 , thats pediatric endocrinology .
So I brought some kids in , and this now became the standard of care , and Childrens Hospital was behind it .
By my showing them the kids before and after , people who never got treated and people who wished to be treated , and pictures of the Dutch , they came to me and said ,  Youve got to do something for these kids . 
Well , where were these kids before ?
They were out there suffering , is where they were .
So we started a program in 2007 .
It became the first program of its kind  -  -  but its really of the Dutch kind  -  -  in North America .
And since then , we have 160 patients .
Did they come from Afghanistan ? No .
They came , 75 percent of them came from within 150 miles of Boston .
And some came from England .
Jackie had been abused in the Midlands , in England .
Shes 12 years old there , she was living as a girl but she was being beaten up .
It was a horror show .
They had to homeschool her .
And the reason the British were coming was because they would not treat anybody with anything under age 16 , which means they were consigning them to an adult body , no matter what happened , even if they tested them well .
Jackie , on top of it , was , by virtue of skeletal markings , destined to be six feet five .
And yet , she had just begun a male puberty .
Well , I did something a little bit innovative , because I do know hormones , and that estrogen is much more potent in closing epiphyses , the growth plates , and stopping growth , than testosterone is .
So we blocked her testosterone with a blocking hormone , but we added estrogen , not at 16 , but at 13 .
And so here she is at 16 , on the left .
And on her 16th birthday , she went to Thailand , where they would do a genital plastic surgery .
They will do it at 18 now .
And she ended up 5 11  but more than that , she has normal breast size , because by blocking testosterone , every one of our patients has normal breast size if they get to us at the appropriate age , not too late .
And on the far right , there she is .
She went public , semifinalist in the Miss England competition .
The judges debated as to , can they do this ?
Can they make her — And one of them quipped , Im told ,  But she has more natural self than half the other contestants . 
And some of them have been rearranged a little bit , but its all her DNA .
And shes become a remarkable spokeswoman .
And she was offered contracts as a model , at which point she teased me , where she said ,  You know , I might have had a better chance as a model if youd made me six feet one . 
Go figure .
So this picture , I think , says it all .
It really says it all .
These are Nicole and brother Jonas , identical twin boys , and proven to be identical , in which Nicole had affirmed herself as a girl as early as age three .
At age seven , they changed her name , and came to me at the very beginnings of a male puberty .
Now you can imagine looking at Jonas at only 14 that male puberty is early in this family , because he looks more like a 16 - year - old , but it makes the point all the more why you have to be conscious of where the patient is .
Nicole has done pubertal blockade in here , and Jonas is just going  -  -  biologic control .
This is what Nicole would look like if we werent doing what we were doing .
Hes got a prominent Adams apple .
Hes got angular bones to the face , a mustache , and you can see theres a height difference because hes gone through a growth spurt that she wont get .
Now Nicole is on estrogen .
She has a bit of a form to her .
This family went to the White House last spring because of their work in overturning an anti - discrimination , there was a bill that would block the right of transgender people in Maine to use public bathrooms , and it looked like the bill was going to pass , and that would have been a problem , but Nicole went personally to every legislator in Maine and said ,  I can do this .
If they see me , theyll understand why Im no threat in the ladys room , but I can be threatened in the mens room . 
And then they finally got it .
So where do we go from here ?
Well , we still have a ways to go in terms of anti - discrimination .
There are only 17 states that have an anti - discrimination law against discrimination in housing , employment , public accommodation , only 17 states , and five of them are in New England .
We need less expensive drugs .
They cost a fortune .
And we need to get this condition out of the DSM .
It is as much a psychiatric disease as being gay and lesbian , and that went out the window in 1973 , and the whole world changed .
And this isnt going to break anybodys budget .
This is not that common .
But the risks of not doing anything for them not only puts all of them at risk of losing their lives to suicide , but it also says something about whether we are a truly inclusive society .
Thank you .
Melinda Gates : What nonprofits can learn from Coca - Cola
In her talk , Melinda Gates makes a provocative case for nonprofits taking a cue from corporations such as Coca - Cola , whose plugged - in , global network of marketers and distributors ensures that every remote village wants  -  -  and can get  -  -  a Coke . Why shouldnt this work for condoms , sanitation , vaccinations too ? 
One of my favorite parts of my job at the Gates Foundation is that I get to travel to the developing world , and I do that quite regularly .
And when I meet the mothers in so many of these remote places , Im really struck by the things that we have in common .
They want what we want for our children and that is for their children to grow up successful , to be healthy , and to have a successful life .
But I also see lots of poverty , and its quite jarring , both in the scale and the scope of it .
My first trip in India , I was in a persons home where they had dirt floors , no running water , no electricity , and thats really what I see all over the world .
So in short , Im startled by all the things that they dont have .
But I am surprised by one thing that they do have : Coca - Cola .
Coke is everywhere .
In fact , when I travel to the developing world , Coke feels ubiquitous .
And so when I come back from these trips , and Im thinking about development , and Im flying home and Im thinking ,  Were trying to deliver condoms to people or vaccinations ,  you know , Cokes success kind of stops and makes you wonder : how is it that they can get Coke to these far - flung places ?
If they can do that , why cant governments and NGOs do the same thing ?
And Im not the first person to ask this question .
But I think , as a community , we still have a lot to learn .
Its staggering , if you think about Coca - Cola .
They sell 1.5 billion servings every single day .
Thats like every man , woman and child on the planet having a serving of Coke every week .
So why does this matter ?
Well , if were going to speed up the progress and go even faster on the set of Millennium Development Goals that were set as a world , we need to learn from the innovators , and those innovators come from every single sector .
I feel that , if we can understand what makes something like Coca - Cola ubiquitous , we can apply those lessons then for the public good .
Cokes success is relevant , because if we can analyze it , learn from it , then we can save lives .
So thats why I took a bit of time to study Coke .
And I think there are really three things we can take away from Coca - Cola .
They take real - time data and immediately feed it back into the product .
They tap into local entrepreneurial talent , and they do incredible marketing .
So lets start with the data .
Now Coke has a very clear bottom line  -  -  they report to a set of shareholders , they have to turn a profit .
So they take the data , and they use it to measure progress .
They have this very continuous feedback loop .
They learn something , they put it back into the product , they put it back into the market .
They have a whole team called  Knowledge and Insight . 
Its a lot like other consumer companies .
So if youre running Namibia for Coca - Cola , and you have a 107 constituencies , you know where every can versus bottle of Sprite , Fanta or Coke was sold , whether it was a corner store , a supermarket or a pushcart .
So if sales start to drop , then the person can identify the problem and address the issue .
Lets contrast that for a minute to development .
In development , the evaluation comes at the very end of the project .
Ive sat in a lot of those meetings , and by then , it is way too late to use the data .
I had somebody from an NGO once describe it to me as bowling in the dark .
They said ,  You roll the ball , you hear some pins go down .
Its dark , you cant see which one goes down until the lights come on , and then you an see your impact . 
Real - time data turns on the lights .
So whats the second thing that Cokes good at ?
Theyre good at tapping into that local entrepreneurial talent .
Cokes been in Africa since 1928 , but most of the time they couldnt reach the distant markets , because they had a system that was a lot like in the developed world , which was a large truck rolling down the street .
And in Africa , the remote places , its hard to find a good road .
But Coke noticed something  -  -  they noticed that local people were taking the product , buying it in bulk and then reselling it in these hard - to - reach places .
And so they took a bit of time to learn about that .
And they decided in 1990 that they wanted to start training the local entrepreneurs , giving them small loans .
They set them up as what they called micro - distribution centers , and those local entrepreneurs then hire sales people , who go out with bicycles and pushcarts and wheelbarrows to sell the product .
There are now some 3,000 of these centers employing about 15,000 people in Africa .
In Tanzania and Uganda , they represent 90 percent of Cokes sales .
Lets look at the development side .
What is it that governments and NGOs can learn from Coke ?
Governments and NGOs need to tap into that local entrepreneurial talent as well , because the locals know how to reach the very hard - to - serve places , their neighbors , and they know what motivates them to make change .
I think a great example of this is Ethiopias new health extension program .
The government noticed in Ethiopia that many of the people were so far away from a health clinic , they were over a days travel away from a health clinic .
So if youre in an emergency situation  -  -  or if youre a mom about to deliver a baby  -  -  forget it , to get to the health care center .
They decided that wasnt good enough , so they went to India and studied the Indian state of Kerala that also had a system like this , and they adapted it for Ethiopia .
And in 2003 , the government of Ethiopia started this new system in their own country .
They trained 35,000 health extension workers to deliver care directly to the people .
In just five years , their ratio went from one worker for every 30,000 people to one worker for every 2,500 people .
Now , think about how this can change peoples lives .
Health extension workers can help with so many things , whether its family planning , prenatal care , immunizations for the children , or advising the woman to get to the facility on time for an on - time delivery .
That is having real impact in a country like Ethiopia , and its why you see their child mortality numbers coming down 25 percent from 2000 to 2008 .
In Ethiopia , there are hundreds of thousands of children living because of this health extension worker program .
So whats the next step for Ethiopia ?
Well , theyre already starting talk about this .
Theyre starting to talk about ,  How do you have the health community workers generate their own ideas ?
How do you incent them based on the impact that theyre getting out in those remote villages ? 
Thats how you tap into local entrepreneurial talent and you unlock peoples potential .
The third component of Cokes success is marketing .
Ultimately , Cokes success depends on one crucial fact and that is that people want a Coca - Cola .
Now the reason these micro - entrepreneurs can sell or make a profit is they have to sell every single bottle in their pushcart or their wheelbarrow .
So , they rely on Coca - Cola in terms of its marketing , and whats the secret to their marketing ?
Well , its aspirational .
It is associated that product with a kind of life that people want to live .
So even though its a global company , they take a very local approach .
Cokes global campaign slogan is  Open Happiness . 
But they localize it .
And they dont just guess what makes people happy ; they go to places like Latin America and they realize that happiness there is associated with family life .
And in South Africa , they associate happiness with seriti or community respect .
Now , that played itself out in the World Cup campaign .
Lets listen to this song that Coke created for it ,  Wavin Flag  by a Somali hip hop artist .
KNaan : Oh oh oh oh oh o - oh Oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh Oh oh oh oh oh o - oh Oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh o - oh Give you freedom , give you fire Give you reason , take you higher See the champions take the field now You define us , make us feel proud In the streets our heads are lifted As we lose our inhibition Celebration , its around us Every nation , all around us Melinda French Gates : It feels pretty good , right ?
Well , they didnt stop there  -  -  they localized it into 18 different languages .
And it went number one on the pop chart in 17 countries .
It reminds me of a song that I remember from my childhood ,  Id Like to Teach the World to Sing ,  that also went number one on the pop charts .
Both songs have something in common : that same appeal of celebration and unity .
So how does health and development market ?
Well , its based on avoidance , not aspirations .
Im sure youve heard some of these messages .
 Use a condom , dont get AIDS . 
 Wash you hands , you might not get diarrhea . 
It doesnt sound anything like  Wavin Flag  to me .
And I think we make a fundamental mistake  -  -  we make an assumption , that we think that , if people need something , we dont have to make them want that .
And I think thats a mistake .
And theres some indications around the world that this is starting to change .
One example is sanitation .
We know that a million and a half children die a year from diarrhea and a lot of it is because of open defecation .
But theres a solution : you build a toilet .
But what were finding around the world , over and over again , is , if you build a toilet and you leave it there , it doesnt get used .
People reuse it for a slab for their home .
They sometimes store grain in it .
Ive even seen it used for a chicken coop .
But what does marketing really entail that would make a sanitation solution get a result in diarrhea ?
Well , you work with the community .
You start to talk to them about why open defecation is something that shouldnt be done in the village , and they agree to that .
But then you take the toilet and you position it as a modern , trendy convenience .
One state in Northern India has gone so far as to link toilets to courtship .
And it works  -  -  look at these headlines .
Im not kidding .
Women are refusing to marry men without toilets .
No loo , no  I do . 
Now , its not just a funny headline  -  -  its innovative . Its an innovative marketing campaign .
But more importantly , it saves lives .
Take a look at this  -  -  this is a room full of young men and my husband , Bill .
And can you guess what the young men are waiting for ?
Theyre waiting to be circumcised .
Can you you believe that ?
We know that circumcision reduces HIV infection by 60 percent in men .
And when we first heard this result inside the Foundation , I have to admit , Bill and I were scratching our heads a little bit and we were saying ,  But whos going to volunteer for this procedure ? 
But it turns out the men do , because theyre hearing from their girlfriends that they prefer it , and the men also believe it improves their sex life .
So if we can start to understand what people really want in health and development , we can change communities and we can change whole nations .
Well , why is all of this so important ?
So lets talk about what happens when this all comes together , when you tie the three things together .
And polio , I think , is one of the most powerful examples .
Weve seen a 99 percent reduction in polio in 20 years .
So if you look back to 1988 , there are about 350,000 cases of polio on the planet that year .
In 2009 , were down to 1,600 cases .
Well how did that happen ?
Lets look at a country like India .
They have over a billion people in this country , but they have 35,000 local doctors who report paralysis , and clinicians , a huge reporting system in chemists .
They have two and a half million vaccinators .
But let me make the story a little bit more concrete for you .
Let me tell you the story of Shriram , an 18 month boy in Bihar , a northern state in India .
This year on August 8th , he felt paralysis and on the 13th , his parents took him to the doctor .
On August 14th and 15th , they took a stool sample , and by the 25th of August , it was confirmed he had Type 1 polio .
By August 30th , a genetic test was done , and we knew what strain of polio Shriram had .
Now it could have come from one of two places .
It could have come from Nepal , just to the north , across the border , or from Jharkhand , a state just to the south .
Luckily , the genetic testing proved that , in fact , this strand came north , because , had it come from the south , it would have had a much wider impact in terms of transmission .
So many more people would have been affected .
So whats the endgame ?
Well on September 4th , there was a huge mop - up campaign , which is what you do in polio .
They went out and where Shriram lives , they vaccinated two million people .
So in less than a month , we went from one case of paralysis to a targeted vaccination program .
And Im happy to say only one other person in that area got polio .
Thats how you keep a huge outbreak from spreading , and it shows what can happen when local people have the data in their hands ; they can save lives .
Now one of the challenges in polio , still , is marketing , but it might not be what you think .
Its not the marketing on the ground .
Its not telling the parents ,  If you see paralysis , take your child to the doctor or get your child vaccinated . 
We have a problem with marketing in the donor community .
The G8 nations have been incredibly generous on polio over the last 20 years , but were starting to have something called polio fatigue and that is that the donor nations arent willing to fund polio any longer .
So by next summer , were sighted to run out of money on polio .
So we are 99 percent of the way there on this goal and were about to run short of money .
And I think that if the marketing were more aspirational , if we could focus as a community on how far weve come and how amazing it would be to eradicate this disease , we could put polio fatigue and polio behind us .
And if we could do that , we could stop vaccinating everybody , worldwide , in all of our countries for polio .
And it would only be the second disease ever wiped off the face of the planet .
And we are so close .
And this victory is so possible .
So if Cokes marketers came to me and asked me to define happiness , Id say my vision of happiness is a mother holding healthy baby in her arms .
To me , that is deep happiness .
And so if we can learn lessons from the innovators in every sector , then in the future we make together , that happiness can be just as ubiquitous as Coca - Cola .
Thank you .
JoAnn Kuchera - Morin : Stunning data visualization in the AlloSphere
JoAnn Kuchera - Morin demos the AlloSphere , a new way to see , hear and interpret scientific data . Dive into the brain , feel electron spin , hear the music of the elements ... and detect previously unseen patterns that could lead to new discoveries .
The AlloSphere : its a three - story metal sphere in an echo - free chamber .
Think of the AlloSphere as a large , dynamically varying digital microscope thats connected to a supercomputer .
20 researchers can stand on a bridge suspended inside of the sphere , and be completely immersed in their data .
Imagine if a team of physicists could stand inside of an atom and watch and hear electrons spin .
Imagine if a group of sculptors could be inside of a lattice of atoms and sculpt with their material .
Imagine if a team of surgeons could fly into the brain , as though it was a world , and see tissues as landscapes , and hear blood density levels as music .
This is some of the research that youre going to see that were undertaking at the AlloSphere .
But first a little bit about this group of artists , scientists , and engineers that are working together .
Im a composer , orchestrally - trained , and the inventor of the AlloSphere .
With my visual artist colleagues , we map complex mathematical algorithms that unfold in time and space , visually and sonically .
Our scientist colleagues are finding new patterns in the information .
And our engineering colleagues are making one of the largest dynamically varying computers in the world for this kind of data exploration .
Im going to fly you into five research projects in the AlloSphere that are going to take you from biological macroscopic data all the way down to electron spin .
This first project is called the AlloBrain .
And its our attempt to quantify beauty by finding which regions of the brain are interactive while witnessing something beautiful .
Youre flying through the cortex of my colleagues brain .
Our narrative here is real fMRI data thats mapped visually and sonically .
The brain now a world that we can fly through and interact with .
You see 12 intelligent computer agents , the little rectangles that are flying in the brain with you .
Theyre mining blood density levels .
And theyre reporting them back to you sonically .
Higher density levels mean more activity in that point of the brain .
Theyre actually singing these densities to you with higher pitches mapped to higher densities .
Were now going to move from real biological data to biogenerative algorithms that create artificial nature in our next artistic and scientific installation .
In this artistic and scientific installation , biogenerative algorithms are helping us to understand self - generation and growth : very important for simulation in the nanoscaled sciences .
For artists , were making new worlds that we can uncover and explore .
These generative algorithms grow over time , and they interact and communicate as a swarm of insects .
Our researchers are interacting with this data by injecting bacterial code , which are computer programs , that allow these creatures to grow over time .
Were going to move now from the biological and the macroscopic world , down into the atomic world , as we fly into a lattice of atoms .
This is real AFM  -  -  Atomic Force Microscope  -  -  data from my colleagues in the Solid State Lighting and Energy Center .
Theyve discovered a new bond , a new material for transparent solar cells .
Were flying through 2,000 lattice of atoms  -  -  oxygen , hydrogen and zinc .
You view the bond in the triangle .
Its four blue zinc atoms bonding with one white hydrogen atom .
You see the electron flow with the streamlines we as artists have generated for the scientists .
This is allowing them to find the bonding nodes in any lattice of atoms .
We think it makes a beautiful structural art .
The sound that youre hearing are the actual emission spectrums of these atoms .
Weve mapped them into the audio domain , so theyre singing to you .
Oxygen , hydrogen and zinc have their own signature .
Were going to actually move even further down as we go from this lattice of atoms to one single hydrogen atom .
Were working with our physicist colleagues that have given us the mathematical calculations of the n - dimensional Schrödinger equation in time .
What youre seeing here right now is a superposition of an electron in the lower three orbitals of a hydrogen atom .
Youre actually hearing and seeing the electron flow with the lines .
The white dots are the probability wave that will show you where the electron is in any given point of time and space in this particular three - orbital configuration .
In a minute were going to move to a two - orbital configuration , and youre going to notice a pulsing .
And youre going to hear an undulation between the sound .
This is actually a light emitter .
As the sound starts to pulse and contract , our physicists can tell when a photon is going to be emitted .
Theyre starting to find new mathematical structures in these calculations .
And theyre understanding more about quantum mathematics .
Were going to move even further down , and go to one single electron spin .
This will be the final project that I show you .
Our colleagues in the Center for Quantum Computation and Spintronics are actually measuring with their lasers decoherence in a single electron spin .
Weve taken this information and weve made a mathematical model out of it .
Youre actually seeing and hearing quantum information flow .
This is very important for the next step in simulating quantum computers and information technology .
So these brief examples that Ive shown you give you an idea of the kind of work that were doing at the University of California , Santa Barbara , to bring together , arts , science and engineering into a new age of math , science and art .
We hope that all of you will come to see the AlloSphere .
Inspire us to think of new ways that we can use this unique instrument that weve created at Santa Barbara .
Thank you very much .
Ben Saunders : Why bother leaving the house ?
Explorer Ben Saunders wants you to go outside ! Not because its always pleasant and happy , but because thats where the meat of life is ,  the juice that we can suck out of our hours and days .  Saunders next outdoor excursion ? To try to be the first in the world to walk from the coast of Antarctica to the South Pole and back again .
I essentially drag sledges for a living , so it doesnt take an awful lot to flummox me intellectually , but Im going to read this question from an interview earlier this year :  Philosophically , does the constant supply of information steal our ability to imagine or replace our dreams of achieving ?
After all , if it is being done somewhere by someone , and we can participate virtually , then why bother leaving the house ? 
Im usually introduced as a polar explorer .
Im not sure thats the most progressive or 21st - century of job titles , but Ive spent more than two percent now of my entire life living in a tent inside the Arctic Circle , so I get out of the house a fair bit .
And in my nature , I guess , I am a doer of things more than I am a spectator or a contemplator of things , and its that dichotomy , the gulf between ideas and action that Im going to try and explore briefly .
The pithiest answer to the question  why ? 
thats been dogging me for the last 12 years was credited certainly to this chap , the rakish - looking gentleman standing at the back , second from the left , George Lee Mallory . Many of you will know his name .
In 1924 he was last seen disappearing into the clouds near the summit of Mt . Everest .
He may or may not have been the first person to climb Everest , more than 30 years before Edmund Hillary .
No one knows if he got to the top . Its still a mystery .
But he was credited with coining the phrase ,  Because its there . 
Now Im not actually sure that he did say that .
Theres very little evidence to suggest it , but what he did say is actually far nicer , and again , Ive printed this . Im going to read it out .
 The first question which you will ask and which I must try to answer is this : What is the use of climbing Mt . Everest ?
And my answer must at once be , it is no use .
There is not the slightest prospect of any gain whatsoever .
Oh , we may learn a little about the behavior of the human body at high altitudes , and possibly medical men may turn our observation to some account for the purposes of aviation , but otherwise nothing will come of it .
We shall not bring back a single bit of gold or silver , and not a gem , nor any coal or iron .
We shall not find a single foot of earth that can be planted with crops to raise food . So it is no use .
If you can not understand that there is something in man which responds to the challenge of this mountain and goes out to meet it , that the struggle is the struggle of life itself upward and forever upward , then you wont see why we go .
What we get from this adventure is just sheer joy , and joy , after all , is the end of life .
We dont live to eat and make money .
We eat and make money to be able to enjoy life .
That is what life means , and that is what life is for . 
Mallorys argument that leaving the house , embarking on these grand adventures is joyful and fun , however , doesnt tally that neatly with my own experience .
The furthest Ive ever got away from my front door was in the spring of 2004 . I still dont know exactly what came over me , but my plan was to make a solo and unsupported crossing of the Arctic Ocean .
I planned essentially to walk from the north coast of Russia to the North Pole , and then to carry on to the north coast of Canada .
No one had ever done this . I was 26 at the time .
A lot of experts were saying it was impossible , and my mum certainly wasnt very keen on the idea .
The journey from a small weather station on the north coast of Siberia up to my final starting point , the edge of the pack ice , the coast of the Arctic Ocean , took about five hours , and if anyone watched fearless Felix Baumgartner going up , rather than just coming down , youll appreciate the sense of apprehension , as I sat in a helicopter thundering north , and the sense , I think if anything , of impending doom .
I sat there wondering what on Earth I had gotten myself into .
There was a bit of fun , a bit of joy .
I was 26 . I remember sitting there looking down at my sledge . I had my skis ready to go , I had a satellite phone , a pump - action shotgun in case I was attacked by a polar bear .
I remember looking out of the window and seeing the second helicopter .
We were both thundering through this incredible Siberian dawn , and part of me felt a bit like a cross between Jason Bourne and Wilfred Thesiger . Part of me felt quite proud of myself , but mostly I was just utterly terrified .
And that journey lasted 10 weeks , 72 days .
I didnt see anyone else . We took this photo next to the helicopter .
Beyond that , I didnt see anyone for 10 weeks .
The North Pole is slap bang in the middle of the sea , so Im traveling over the frozen surface of the Arctic Ocean .
NASA described conditions that year as the worst since records began .
I was dragging 180 kilos of food and fuel and supplies , about 400 pounds . The average temperature for the 10 weeks was minus 35 . Minus 50 was the coldest .
So again , there wasnt an awful lot of joy or fun to be had .
One of the magical things about this journey , however , is that because Im walking over the sea , over this floating , drifting , shifting crust of ice thats floating on top of the Arctic Ocean is its an environment thats in a constant state of flux .
The ice is always moving , breaking up , drifting around , refreezing , so the scenery that I saw for nearly 3 months was unique to me . No one else will ever , could ever , possibly see the views , the vistas , that I saw for 10 weeks .
And that , I guess , is probably the finest argument for leaving the house .
I can try to tell you what it was like , but youll never know what it was like , and the more I try to explain that I felt lonely , I was the only human being in 5.4 million square - miles , it was cold , nearly minus 75 with windchill on a bad day , the more words fall short , and Im unable to do it justice .
And it seems to me , therefore , that the doing , you know , to try to experience , to engage , to endeavor , rather than to watch and to wonder , thats where the real meat of life is to be found , the juice that we can suck out of our hours and days .
And I would add a cautionary note here , however .
In my experience , there is something addictive about tasting life at the very edge of whats humanly possible .
Now I dont just mean in the field of daft macho Edwardian style derring - do , but also in the fields of pancreatic cancer , there is something addictive about this , and in my case , I think polar expeditions are perhaps not that far removed from having a crack habit .
I cant explain quite how good it is until youve tried it , but it has the capacity to burn up all the money I can get my hands on , to ruin every relationship Ive ever had , so be careful what you wish for .
Mallory postulated that there is something in man that responds to the challenge of the mountain , and I wonder if thats the case whether theres something in the challenge itself , in the endeavor , and particularly in the big , unfinished , chunky challenges that face humanity that call out to us , and in my experience thats certainly the case .
There is one unfinished challenge thats been calling out to me for most of my adult life .
Many of you will know the story .
This is a photo of Captain Scott and his team .
Scott set out just over a hundred years ago to try to become the first person to reach the South Pole .
No one knew what was there . It was utterly unmapped at the time . We knew more about the surface of the moon than we did about the heart of Antarctica .
Scott , as many of you will know , was beaten to it by Roald Amundsen and his Norwegian team , who used dogs and dogsleds . Scotts team were on foot , all five of them wearing harnesses and dragging around sledges , and they arrived at the pole to find the Norwegian flag already there , Id imagine pretty bitter and demoralized .
All five of them turned and started walking back to the coast and all five died on that return journey .
There is a sort of misconception nowadays that its all been done in the fields of exploration and adventure .
When I talk about Antarctica , people often say ,  Hasnt , you know , thats interesting , hasnt that Blue Peter presenter just done it on a bike ? 
Or ,  Thats nice . You know , my grandmothers going on a cruise to Antarctica next year . You know .
Is there a chance youll see her there ? 
But Scotts journey remains unfinished .
No one has ever walked from the very coast of Antarctica to the South Pole and back again .
It is , arguably , the most audacious endeavor of that Edwardian golden age of exploration , and it seemed to me high time , given everything we have figured out in the century since from scurvy to solar panels , that it was high time someone had a go at finishing the job .
So thats precisely what Im setting out to do .
This time next year , in October , Im leading a team of three .
It will take us about four months to make this return journey .
Thats the scale . The red line is obviously halfway to the pole .
We have to turn around and come back again .
Im well aware of the irony of telling you that we will be blogging and tweeting . Youll be able to live vicariously and virtually through this journey in a way that no one has ever before .
And itll also be a four - month chance for me to finally come up with a pithy answer to the question ,  Why ? 
And our lives today are safer and more comfortable than they have ever been . There certainly isnt much call for explorers nowadays . My career advisor at school never mentioned it as an option .
If I wanted to know , for example , how many stars were in the Milky Way , how old those giant heads on Easter Island were , most of you could find that out right now without even standing up .
And yet , if Ive learned anything in nearly 12 years now of dragging heavy things around cold places , it is that true , real inspiration and growth only comes from adversity and from challenge , from stepping away from whats comfortable and familiar and stepping out into the unknown .
In life , we all have tempests to ride and poles to walk to , and I think metaphorically speaking , at least , we could all benefit from getting outside the house a little more often , if only we could summon up the courage .
I certainly would implore you to open the door just a little bit and take a look at whats outside .
Thank you very much .
Tal Golesworthy : How I repaired my own heart
Tal Golesworthy is a boiler engineer  -  -  he knows piping and plumbing . When he needed surgery to repair a life - threatening problem with his aorta , he mixed his engineering skills with his doctors medical knowledge to design a better repair job .
Im a process engineer .
I know all about boilers and incinerators and fabric filters and cyclones and things like that , but I also have Marfan syndrome .
This is an inherited disorder .
And in 1992 I participated in a genetic study and found to my horror , as you can see from the slide , that my ascending aorta was not in the normal range , the green line at the bottom .
Everyone in here will be between 3.2 and 3.6 cm .
I was already up at 4.4 .
And as you can see , my aorta dilated progressively , and I got closer and closer to the point where surgery was going to be necessary .
The surgery on offer was pretty gruesome  -  -  anesthetize you , open your chest , put you on an artificial heart and lung machine , drop your body temperature to about 18 centigrade , stop your heart , cut the aorta out , replace it with a plastic valve and a plastic aorta , and , most importantly , commit you to a lifetime of anticoagulation therapy , normally warfarin .
The thought of the surgery was not attractive .
The thought of the warfarin was really quite frightening .
So I said to myself , Im an engineer , Im in R and D , this is just a plumbing problem .
I can do this . I can change this .
So I set out to change the entire treatment for aortic dilation .
The project aim is really quite simple .
The only real problem with the ascending aorta in people with Marfan syndrome is it lacks some tensile strength .
So the possibility exists to simply externally wrap the pipe .
And it would remain stable and operate quite happily .
If your high - pressure hose pipe , or your high - pressure hydraulic line , bulges a little , you just wrap some tape around the outside of it .
It really is that simple in concept , though not in execution .
The great advantage of an external support for me was that I could retain all of my own bits , all of my own endothelium and valves , and not need any anticoagulation therapy .
So where do we start ?
Well this is a sagittal slice through me .
You could see in the middle that device , that little structure , squeezing out .
Now thats a left ventricle pushing blood up through the aortic valve  -  -  you can see two of the leaflets of the aortic valve working there  -  -  up into the ascending aorta .
And its that part , the ascending aorta , which dilates and ultimately bursts , which , of course , is fatal .
We started by organizing image acquisition from magnetic resonance imaging machines and CT imaging machines from which to make a model of the patients aorta .
This is a model of my aorta .
Ive got a real one in my pocket , if anyone would like to look at it and play with it .
You can see , its quite a complex structure .
It has a funny trilobal shape at the bottom , which contains the aortic valve .
It then comes back into a round form and then tapers and curves off .
So its quite a difficult structure to produce .
This , like I say , is a CAD model of me , and this is one of the later CAD models .
We went through an iterative process of producing better and better models .
When we produced that model we turn it into a solid plastic model , as you can see , using a rapid prototyping technique , another engineering technique .
We then use that former to manufacture a perfectly bespoke porous textile mesh , which takes the shape of the former and perfectly fits the aorta .
So this is absolutely personalized medicine at its best really .
Every patient we do has an absolutely bespoke implant .
Once youve made it , the installations quite easy .
John Pepper , bless his heart , professor of cardiothoracic surgery  -  -  never done it before in his life  -  -  he put the first one in , didnt like it , took it out , put the second one in .
Happy , away I went .
Four and a half hours on the table and everything was done .
So the surgical implantation actually was the easiest part .
If you compare our new treatment to the existing alternative , the so - called composite aortic root graft , there are one of two startling comparisons , which Im sure will be clear to all of you .
Two hours to install one of our devices compared to six hours for the existing treatment .
The existing treatment requires , as Ive said , the heart and lung bypass machine and it requires a total body cooling .
We dont need any of that ; we work on a beating heart .
He opens you up , he accesses the aorta while your heart is beating , all at the right temperature .
No breaking into your circulatory system .
So it really is great .
But for me , absolutely the best point is there is no anticoagulation therapy required .
I dont take any drugs at all other than recreational ones that I would choose to take .
And in fact , if you speak to people who are on long - term warfarin , it is a serious compromise to your quality of life .
And even worse , it inevitably foreshortens your life .
Likewise , if you have the artificial valve option , youre committed to antibiotic therapy whenever you have any intrusive medical treatment at all .
Even trips to the dentist require that you take antibiotics , in case you get an internal infection on the valve .
Again , I dont have any of that , so Im entirely free .
My aorta is fixed , I havent got to worry about it , which is a rebirth for me .
Back to the theme of the presentation : In multidisciplinary research , how on earth does a process engineer used to working with boilers end up producing a medical device which transforms his own life ?
Well the answer to that is a multidisciplinary team .
This is a list of the core team .
And as you can see , there are not only two principal technical disciplines there , medicine and engineering , but also there are various specialists from within those two disciplines .
John Pepper there was the cardiac surgeon who did the actual work on me , but everyone else there had to contribute one way or another .
Raad Mohiaddin , medical radiologist : We had to get good quality images from which to make the CAD model .
Warren Thornton , who still does all our CAD models for us , had to write a bespoke piece of CAD code to produce this model from this really rather difficult input data set .
There are some barriers to this though . There are some problems with it .
Jargon is a big one .
I would think no one in this room understands those four first jargon points there .
The engineers amongst you will recognize rapid prototyping and CAD .
The medics amongst you , if there are any , will recognize the first two .
But there will be nobody else in this room that understands all of those four words .
Taking the jargon out was very important to ensure that everyone in the team understood exactly what was meant when a particular phrase was used .
Our disciplinary conventions were funny as well .
We took a lot of horizontal slice images through me , produced those slices and then used those to build a CAD model .
And the very first CAD model we made , the surgeons were playing with the plastic model , couldnt quite figure it out .
And then we realized that it was actually a mirror image of the real aorta .
And it was a mirror image because in the real world we always look down on plans , plans of houses or streets or maps .
In the medical world they look up at plans .
So the horizontal images were all an inversion .
So one needs to be careful with disciplinary conventions .
Everyone needs to understand what is assumed and what is not assumed .
Institutional barriers were another serious headache in the project .
The Brompton Hospital was taken over by Imperial Colleges School of Medicine , and there are some seriously bad relationship problems between the two organizations .
I was working with Imperial and the Brompton , and this generated some serious problems with the project , really problems that shouldnt exist .
Research and ethics committee : If you want to do anything new in surgery , you have to get a license from your local research and ethics .
Im sure its the same in Poland .
There will be some form of equivalent , which licenses new types of surgery .
We didnt only have the bureaucratic problems associated with that , was also had professional jealousies .
There were people on the research and ethics committee who really didnt want to see John Pepper succeed again , because hes so successful .
And they made extra problems for us .
Bureaucratic problems : Ultimately when you have a new treatment you have to have a guidance note going out for all of the hospitals in the country .
In the U.K . we have the National Institute for Clinical Excellence , NICE .
Youll have an equivalent in Poland , no doubt .
We had to get past the NICE problem .
We now have a great clinical guidance out on the Net .
So any of the hospitals interested can come along , read the NICE report get in touch with us and then get doing it themselves .
Funding barriers : Another big area to be concerned with .
A big problem with understanding one of those perspectives : When we first approached one of the big U.K . charitable organizations that funds this kind of stuff , what they were looking at was essentially an engineering proposal .
They didnt understand it ; they were doctors , they were next to God .
It must be rubbish . They binned it .
So in the end I went to private investors and I just gave up on it .
But most R and D is going to be institutionally funded , by the Polish Academy of Sciences or the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council or whatever , and you need to get past those people .
Jargon is a huge problem when youre trying to work across disciplines , because in an engineering world , we all understand CAD and R.P.  -  -  not in the medical world .
I suppose ultimately the funding bureaucrats have really got to get their act together .
Theyve really got to start talking to each other , and theyve got to exercise a bit of imagination , if thats not too much to ask  -  -  which it probably is .
Ive coined a phrase  obstructive conservatism . 
So many people in the medical world dont want to change , particularly not when some jumped - up engineer has come along with the answer .
They dont want to change .
They simply want to do whatever theyve done before .
And in fact , there are many surgeons in the U.K .
still waiting for one of our patients so that they can say ,  Ah , I told you that was no good . 
Weve actually got 30 patients .
Im at seven and a half years .
Weve got 90 post - op patient years between us , and we havent had a single problem .
And still , there are people in the U.K . saying ,  Yeah , that external aortic root , yeah , itll never work , you know . 
It really is a problem . It really is a problem .
Im sure everyone in this room has come across arrogance amongst medics , doctors , surgeons at some point .
The middle point is simply the way that the doctors protect themselves .
 Yeah , well of course , Im looking after my patient . 
I think its not good , but there you are , thats my view .
Egos , of course , again , a huge problem If youre working in a multidisciplinary team , youve got to give your guys the benefit of the doubt .
Youve got to express support for them .
Tom Treasure , professor of cardiothoracic surgery : incredible guy .
Dead easy to give him respect .
Him giving me respect ? Slightly different .
Thats all the bad news .
The good news is the benefits are stonkingly huge .
Translate that one . I bet they cant .
When you have a group of people who have had a different professional training , a different professional experience , they not only have a different knowledge base , but they have a different perspective on everything .
And if you can bring those guys together and you can get them talking and understanding each other , the results can be spectacular .
You can find novel solutions , really novel solutions , that have never been looked at before very , very quickly and easily .
You can shortcut huge amounts of work simply by using the extended knowledge base you have .
And as a result , its an entirely different use of the technology and the knowledge around you .
The result of all this is that you can get incredibly quick progress on incredibly small budgets .
Im so embarrassed at how cheap it was to get from my idea to me being implanted that Im not prepared to tell you what it cost .
Because I suspect there are absolutely standard surgical treatments probably in the USA which cost more for a one - off patient than the cost of us getting from my dream to my reality .
Thats all I want to say , and Ive got three minutes left .
So Heathers going to like me .
If you have any questions , please come up and talk to me later on .
It would be a pleasure to speak with you . Many thanks .
Mark Bittman : Whats wrong with what we eat
In this fiery and funny talk , New York Times food writer Mark Bittman weighs in on whats wrong with the way we eat now , and why its putting the entire planet at risk .
I write about food . I write about cooking .
I take it quite seriously , but Im here to talk about something thats become very important to me in the last year or two .
It is about food , but its not about cooking , per se .
Im going to start with this picture of a beautiful cow .
Im not a vegetarian  -  -  this is the old Nixon line , right ?
But I still think that this  -  -   -  -  may be this years version of this .
Now , that is only a little bit hyperbolic .
And why do I say it ?
Because only once before has the fate of individual people and the fate of all of humanity been so intertwined .
There was the bomb , and theres now .
And where we go from here is going to determine not only the quality and the length of our individual lives , but whether , if we could see the Earth a century from now , wed recognize it .
Its a holocaust of a different kind , and hiding under our desks isnt going to help .
Start with the notion that global warming is not only real , but dangerous .
Since every scientist in the world now believes this , and even President Bush has seen the light , or pretends to , we can take this is a given .
Then hear this , please .
After energy production , livestock is the second - highest contributor to atmosphere - altering gases .
Nearly one - fifth of all greenhouse gas is generated by livestock production  -  -  more than transportation .
Now , you can make all the jokes you want about cow farts , but methane is 20 times more poisonous than CO2 , and its not just methane .
Livestock is also one of the biggest culprits in land degradation , air and water pollution , water shortages and loss of biodiversity .
Theres more .
Like half the antibiotics in this country are not administered to people , but to animals .
But lists like this become kind of numbing , so let me just say this : if youre a progressive , if youre driving a Prius , or youre shopping green , or youre looking for organic , you should probably be a semi - vegetarian .
Now , Im no more anti - cattle than I am anti - atom , but its all in the way we use these things .
Theres another piece of the puzzle , which Ann Cooper talked about beautifully yesterday , and one you already know .
Theres no question , none , that so - called lifestyle diseases  -  -  diabetes , heart disease , stroke , some cancers  -  -  are diseases that are far more prevalent here than anywhere in the rest of the world .
And thats the direct result of eating a Western diet .
Our demand for meat , dairy and refined carbohydrates  -  -  the world consumes one billion cans or bottles of Coke a day  -  -  our demand for these things , not our need , our want , drives us to consume way more calories than are good for us .
And those calories are in foods that cause , not prevent , disease .
Now global warming was unforeseen .
We didnt know that pollution did more than cause bad visibility .
Maybe a few lung diseases here and there , but , you know , thats not such a big deal .
The current health crisis , however , is a little more the work of the evil empire .
We were told , we were assured , that the more meat and dairy and poultry we ate , the healthier wed be .
No . Overconsumption of animals , and of course , junk food , is the problem , along with our paltry consumption of plants .
Now , theres no time to get into the benefits of eating plants here , but the evidence is that plants  -  -  and I want to make this clear  -  -  its not the ingredients in plants , its the plants .
Its not the beta - carotene , its the carrot .
The evidence is very clear that plants promote health .
This evidence is overwhelming at this point .
You eat more plants , you eat less other stuff , you live longer .
Not bad .
But back to animals and junk food .
What do they have in common ?
One : we dont need either of them for health .
We dont need animal products , and we certainly dont need white bread or Coke .
Two : both have been marketed heavily , creating unnatural demand .
Were not born craving Whoppers or Skittles .
Three : their production has been supported by government agencies at the expense of a more health -  and Earth - friendly diet .
Now , lets imagine a parallel .
Lets pretend that our government supported an oil - based economy , while discouraging more sustainable forms of energy , knowing all the while that the result would be pollution , war and rising costs .
Incredible , isnt it ?
Yet they do that .
And they do this here . Its the same deal .
The sad thing is , when it comes to diet , is that even when well - intentioned Feds try to do right by us , they fail .
Either theyre outvoted by puppets of agribusiness , or they are puppets of agribusiness .
So , when the USDA finally acknowledged that it was plants , rather than animals , that made people healthy , they encouraged us , via their overly simplistic food pyramid , to eat five servings of fruits and vegetables a day , along with more carbs .
What they didnt tell us is that some carbs are better than others , and that plants and whole grains should be supplanting eating junk food .
But industry lobbyists would never let that happen .
And guess what ?
Half the people who developed the food pyramid have ties to agribusiness .
So , instead of substituting plants for animals , our swollen appetites simply became larger , and the most dangerous aspects of them remained unchanged .
So - called low - fat diets , so - called low - carb diets  -  -  these are not solutions .
But with lots of intelligent people focusing on whether food is organic or local , or whether were being nice to animals , the most important issues just arent being addressed .
Now , dont get me wrong .
I like animals , and I dont think its just fine to industrialize their production and to churn them out like they were wrenches .
But theres no way to treat animals well , when youre killing 10 billion of them a year .
Thats our number . 10 billion .
If you strung all of them  -  -  chickens , cows , pigs and lambs  -  -  to the moon , theyd go there and back five times , there and back .
Now , my maths a little shaky , but this is pretty good , and it depends whether a pig is four feet long or five feet long , but you get the idea .
Thats just the United States .
And with our hyper - consumption of those animals producing greenhouse gases and heart disease , kindness might just be a bit of a red herring .
Lets get the numbers of the animals were killing for eating down , and then well worry about being nice to the ones that are left .
Another red herring might be exemplified by the word  locavore ,  which was just named word of the year by the New Oxford American Dictionary .
Seriously .
And locavore , for those of you who dont know , is someone who eats only locally grown food  -  -  which is fine if you live in California , but for the rest of us its a bit of a sad joke .
Between the official story  -  -  the food pyramid  -  -  and the hip locavore vision , you have two versions of how to improve our eating .
They both get it wrong , though .
The first at least is populist , and the second is elitist .
How we got to this place is the history of food in the United States .
And Im going to go through that , at least the last hundred years or so , very quickly right now .
A hundred years ago , guess what ?
Everyone was a locavore : even New York had pig farms nearby , and shipping food all over the place was a ridiculous notion .
Every family had a cook , usually a mom .
And those moms bought and prepared food .
It was like your romantic vision of Europe .
Margarine didnt exist .
In fact , when margarine was invented , several states passed laws declaring that it had to be dyed pink , so wed all know that it was a fake .
There was no snack food , and until the 20s , until Clarence Birdseye came along , there was no frozen food .
There were no restaurant chains .
There were neighborhood restaurants run by local people , but none of them would think to open another one .
Eating ethnic was unheard of unless you were ethnic .
And fancy food was entirely French .
As an aside , those of you who remember Dan Aykroyd in the 1970s doing Julia Child imitations can see where he got the idea of stabbing himself from this fabulous slide .
Back in those days , before even Julia , back in those days , there was no philosophy of food .
You just ate .
You didnt claim to be anything .
There was no marketing . There were no national brands .
Vitamins had not been invented .
There were no health claims , at least not federally sanctioned ones .
Fats , carbs , proteins  -  -  they werent bad or good , they were food .
You ate food .
Hardly anything contained more than one ingredient , because it was an ingredient .
The cornflake hadnt been invented .
The Pop - Tart , the Pringle , Cheez Whiz , none of that stuff .
Goldfish swam .
Its hard to imagine . People grew food , and they ate food .
And again , everyone ate local .
In New York , an orange was a common Christmas present , because it came all the way from Florida .
From the 30s on , road systems expanded , trucks took the place of railroads , fresh food began to travel more .
Oranges became common in New York .
The South and West became agricultural hubs , and in other parts of the country , suburbs took over farmland .
The effects of this are well known . They are everywhere .
And the death of family farms is part of this puzzle , as is almost everything from the demise of the real community to the challenge of finding a good tomato , even in summer .
Eventually , California produced too much food to ship fresh , so it became critical to market canned and frozen foods .
Thus arrived convenience .
It was sold to proto - feminist housewives as a way to cut down on housework .
Now , I know everybody over the age of , like 45  -  -  their mouths are watering at this point .
If we had a slide of Salisbury steak , even more so , right ?
But this may have cut down on housework , but it cut down on the variety of food we ate as well .
Many of us grew up never eating a fresh vegetable except the occasional raw carrot or maybe an odd lettuce salad .
I , for one  -  -  and Im not kidding  -  -  didnt eat real spinach or broccoli till I was 19 .
Who needed it though ? Meat was everywhere .
What could be easier , more filling or healthier for your family than broiling a steak ?
But by then cattle were already raised unnaturally .
Rather than spending their lives eating grass , for which their stomachs were designed , they were forced to eat soy and corn .
They have trouble digesting those grains , of course , but that wasnt a problem for producers .
New drugs kept them healthy .
Well , they kept them alive .
Healthy was another story .
Thanks to farm subsidies , the fine collaboration between agribusiness and Congress , soy , corn and cattle became king .
And chicken soon joined them on the throne .
It was during this period that the cycle of dietary and planetary destruction began , the thing were only realizing just now .
Listen to this , between 1950 and 2000 , the worlds population doubled .
Meat consumption increased five - fold .
Now , someone had to eat all that stuff , so we got fast food .
And this took care of the situation resoundingly .
Home cooking remained the norm , but its quality was down the tubes .
There were fewer meals with home - cooked breads , desserts and soups , because all of them could be bought at any store .
Not that they were any good , but they were there .
Most moms cooked like mine : a piece of broiled meat , a quickly made salad with bottled dressing , canned soup , canned fruit salad .
Maybe baked or mashed potatoes , or perhaps the stupidest food ever , Minute Rice .
For dessert , store - bought ice cream or cookies .
My mom is not here , so I can say this now .
This kind of cooking drove me to learn how to cook for myself .
It wasnt all bad .
By the 70s , forward - thinking people began to recognize the value of local ingredients .
We tended gardens , we became interested in organic food , we knew or we were vegetarians .
We werent all hippies , either .
Some of us were eating in good restaurants and learning how to cook well .
Meanwhile , food production had become industrial . Industrial .
Perhaps because it was being produced rationally , as if it were plastic , food gained magical or poisonous powers , or both .
Many people became fat - phobic .
Others worshiped broccoli , as if it were God - like .
But mostly they didnt eat broccoli .
Instead they were sold on yogurt , yogurt being almost as good as broccoli .
Except , in reality , the way the industry sold yogurt was to convert it to something much more akin to ice cream .
Similarly , lets look at a granola bar .
You think that that might be healthy food , but in fact , if you look at the ingredient list , its closer in form to a Snickers than it is to oatmeal .
Sadly , it was at this time that the family dinner was put in a coma , if not actually killed  -  -  the beginning of the heyday of value - added food , which contained as many soy and corn products as could be crammed into it .
Think of the frozen chicken nugget .
The chicken is fed corn , and then its meat is ground up , and mixed with more corn products to add bulk and binder , and then its fried in corn oil .
All you do is nuke it . What could be better ?
And zapped horribly , pathetically .
By the 70s , home cooking was in such a sad state that the high fat and spice contents of foods like McNuggets and Hot Pockets  -  -  and we all have our favorites , actually  -  -  made this stuff more appealing than the bland things that people were serving at home .
At the same time , masses of women were entering the workforce , and cooking simply wasnt important enough for men to share the burden .
So now , youve got your pizza nights , youve got your microwave nights , youve got your grazing nights , youve got your fend - for - yourself nights and so on .
Leading the way  -  -  whats leading the way ?
Meat , junk food , cheese : the very stuff that will kill you .
So , now we clamor for organic food .
Thats good .
And as evidence that things can actually change , you can now find organic food in supermarkets , and even in fast - food outlets .
But organic food isnt the answer either , at least not the way its currently defined .
Let me pose you a question .
Can farm - raised salmon be organic , when its feed has nothing to do with its natural diet , even if the feed itself is supposedly organic , and the fish themselves are packed tightly in pens , swimming in their own filth ?
And if that salmons from Chile , and its killed down there and then flown 5,000 miles , whatever , dumping how much carbon into the atmosphere ?
I dont know .
Packed in Styrofoam , of course , before landing somewhere in the United States , and then being trucked a few hundred more miles .
This may be organic in letter , but its surely not organic in spirit .
Now here is where we all meet .
The locavores , the organivores , the vegetarians , the vegans , the gourmets and those of us who are just plain interested in good food .
Even though weve come to this from different points , we all have to act on our knowledge to change the way that everyone thinks about food .
We need to start acting .
And this is not only an issue of social justice , as Ann Cooper said  -  -  and , of course , shes completely right  -  -  but its also one of global survival .
Which bring me full circle and points directly to the core issue , the overproduction and overconsumption of meat and junk food .
As I said , 18 percent of greenhouse gases are attributed to livestock production .
How much livestock do you need to produce this ?
70 percent of the agricultural land on Earth , 30 percent of the Earths land surface is directly or indirectly devoted to raising the animals well eat .
And this amount is predicted to double in the next 40 years or so .
And if the numbers coming in from China are anything like what they look like now , its not going to be 40 years .
There is no good reason for eating as much meat as we do .
And I say this as a man who has eaten a fair share of corned beef in his life .
The most common argument is that we need nutrients  -  -  even though we eat , on average , twice as much protein as even the industry - obsessed USDA recommends .
But listen : experts who are serious about disease reduction recommend that adults eat just over half a pound of meat per week .
What do you think we eat per day ? Half a pound .
But dont we need meat to be big and strong ?
Isnt meat eating essential to health ?
Wont a diet heavy in fruit and vegetables turn us into godless , sissy , liberals ?
Some of us might think that would be a good thing .
But , no , even if we were all steroid - filled football players , the answer is no .
In fact , theres no diet on Earth that meets basic nutritional needs that wont promote growth , and many will make you much healthier than ours does .
We dont eat animal products for sufficient nutrition , we eat them to have an odd form of malnutrition , and its killing us .
To suggest that in the interests of personal and human health Americans eat 50 percent less meat  -  -  its not enough of a cut , but its a start .
It would seem absurd , but thats exactly what should happen , and what progressive people , forward - thinking people should be doing and advocating , along with the corresponding increase in the consumption of plants .
Ive been writing about food more or less omnivorously  -  -  one might say indiscriminately  -  -  for about 30 years .
During that time , Ive eaten and recommended eating just about everything .
Ill never stop eating animals , Im sure , but I do think that for the benefit of everyone , the time has come to stop raising them industrially and stop eating them thoughtlessly .
Ann Coopers right .
The USDA is not our ally here .
We have to take matters into our own hands , not only by advocating for a better diet for everyone  -  -  and thats the hard part  -  -  but by improving our own .
And that happens to be quite easy .
Less meat , less junk , more plants .
Its a simple formula : eat food .
Eat real food .
We can continue to enjoy our food , and we continue to eat well , and we can eat even better .
We can continue the search for the ingredients we love , and we can continue to spin yarns about our favorite meals .
Well reduce not only calories , but our carbon footprint .
We can make food more important , not less , and save ourselves by doing so .
We have to choose that path .
Thank you .
David Hanson : Robots that  show emotion 
David Hansons robot faces look and act like yours : They recognize and respond to emotion , and make expressions of their own . Here , an  emotional  live demo of the Einstein robot offers a peek at a future where robots truly mimic humans .
Im Dr . David Hanson , and I build robots with character .
And by that , I mean that I develop robots that are characters , but also robots that will eventually come to empathize with you .
So were starting with a variety of technologies that have converged into these conversational character robots that can see faces , make eye contact with you , make a full range of facial expressions , understand speech and begin to model how youre feeling and who you are , and build a relationship with you .
I developed a series of technologies that allowed the robots to make more realistic facial expressions than previously achieved , on lower power , So , its a full range of facial expressions simulating all the major muscles in the human face , running on very small batteries , extremely lightweight .
The materials that allowed the battery - operated facial expressions is a material that we call Frubber , and it actually has three major innovations in the material that allow this to happen .
One is hierarchical pores , and the other is a macro - molecular nanoscale porosity in the material .
There hes starting to walk .
This is at the Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology .
I built the head . They built the body .
So the goal here is to achieve sentience in machines , and not just sentience , but empathy .
Were working with the Machine Perception Laboratory at the U.C . San Diego .
They have this really remarkable facial expression technology that recognizes facial expressions , what facial expressions youre making .
It also recognizes where youre looking , your head orientation .
Were emulating all the major facial expressions , and then controlling it with the software that we call the Character Engine .
And here is a little bit of the technology thats involved in that .
In fact , right now  -  -  plug it from here , and then plug it in here , and now lets see if it gets my facial expressions .
Okay . So Im smiling .
Now Im frowning .
And this is really heavily backlit .
Okay , here we go .
Oh , its so sad .
Okay , so you smile , frowning .
So his perception of your emotional states is very important for machines to effectively become empathetic .
Machines are becoming devastatingly capable of things like killing . Right ?
Those machines have no place for empathy .
And there is billions of dollars being spent on that .
Character robotics could plant the seed for robots that actually have empathy .
So , if they achieve human level intelligence or , quite possibly , greater than human levels of intelligence , this could be the seeds of hope for our future .
So , weve made 20 robots in the last eight years , during the course of getting my Ph.D .
And then I started Hanson Robotics , which has been developing these things for mass manufacturing .
This is one of our robots that we showed at Wired NextFest a couple of years ago .
And it sees multiple people in a scene , remembers where individual people are , and looks from person to person , remembering people .
So , were involving two things .
One , the perception of people , and two , the natural interface , the natural form of the interface , so that its more intuitive for you to interact with the robot .
You start to believe that its alive and aware .
So one of my favorite projects was bringing all this stuff together in an artistic display of an android portrait of science - fiction writer Philip K. Dick , who wrote great works like ,  Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? 
which was the basis of the movie  Bladerunner . 
In these stories , robots often think that theyre human , and they sort of come to life .
So we put his writings , letters , his interviews , correspondences , into a huge database of thousands of pages , and then used some natural language processing to allow you to actually have a conversation with him .
And it was kind of spooky , because he would say these things that just sounded like they really understood you .
And this is one of the most exciting projects that were developing , for friendly artificial intelligence , friendly machine intelligence .
And were getting this mass - manufactured .
We specked it out to actually be doable with a very , very low - cost bill of materials , so that it can become a childhood companion for kids .
Interfacing with the Internet , it gets smarter over the years .
As artificial intelligence evolves , so does his intelligence .
Thank you so much . Thats incredible .
Gever Tulley : Life lessons through tinkering
Gever Tulley uses engaging photos and footage to demonstrate the valuable lessons kids learn at his Tinkering School . When given tools , materials and guidance , these young imaginations run wild and creative problem - solving takes over to build unique boats , bridges and even a roller coaster !
This is the exact moment that I started creating something called Tinkering School .
Tinkering School is a place where kids can pick up sticks and hammers and other dangerous objects , and be trusted .
Trusted not to hurt themselves , and trusted not to hurt others .
Tinkering School doesnt follow a set curriculum , and there are no tests .
Were not trying to teach anybody any specific thing .
When the kids arrive theyre confronted with lots of stuff : wood and nails and rope and wheels , and lots of tools , real tools .
Its a six - day immersive experience for the kids .
And within that context , we can offer the kids time  -  -  something that seems in short supply in their over - scheduled lives .
Our goal is to ensure that they leave with a better sense of how to make things than when they arrived , and the deep internal realization that you can figure things out by fooling around .
Nothing ever turns out as planned ... ever .
And the kids soon learn that all projects go awry  -  -  and become at ease with the idea that every step in a project is a step closer to sweet success , or gleeful calamity .
We start from doodles and sketches .
And sometimes we make real plans .
And sometimes we just start building .
Building is at the heart of the experience : hands on , deeply immersed and fully committed to the problem at hand .
Robin and I , acting as collaborators , keep the landscape of the projects tilted towards completion .
Success is in the doing , and failures are celebrated and analyzed .
Problems become puzzles and obstacles disappear .
When faced with particularly difficult setbacks or complexities , a really interesting behavior emerges : decoration .
Decoration of the unfinished project is a kind of conceptual incubation .
From these interludes come deep insights and amazing new approaches to solving the problems that had them frustrated just moments before .
All materials are available for use .
Even those mundane , hateful , plastic grocery bags can become a bridge stronger than anyone imagined .
And the things that they build amaze even themselves .
Three , two , one , go !
Gever Tulley : A rollercoaster built by seven - year - olds .
Yay !
GT : Thank you . Its been a great pleasure .
Marco Tempest : Augmented reality , techno - magic
Using sleight - of - hand techniques and charming storytelling , illusionist Marco Tempest brings a jaunty stick figure to life onstage at TEDGlobal .
So magic is a very introverted field .
While scientists regularly publish their latest research , we magicians do not like to share our methods and secrets .
Thats true even amongst peers .
But if you look at creative practice as a form of research , or art as a form of R and D for humanity , then how could a cyber illusionist like myself share his research ?
Now my own speciality is combining digital technology and magic .
And about three years ago , I started an exercise in openness and inclusiveness by reaching out into the open - source software community to create new digital tools for magic  -  -  tools that could eventually be shared with other artists to start them off further on in the process and to get them to the poetry faster .
Today , Id like to show you something which came out of these collaborations .
Its an augmented reality projection tracking and mapping system , or a digital storytelling tool .
Could we bring down the lights please ? Thank you .
So lets give this a try .
And Im going to use it to give you my take on the stuff of life .
Terribly sorry . I forgot the floor .
Wake up .
Hey .
Come on .
Please .
Come on .
Ah , sorry about that .
Forgot this .
Give it another try .
Okay .
He figured out the system .
Uh oh .
All right . Lets try this .
Come on .
Hey .
You heard her , go ahead .
Bye - bye .
Jackson Browne : A song inspired by the ocean
Jackson Browne plays a song he started writing last April aboard Mission Blue Voyage , the Sylvia Earle - inspired trip to brainstorm ways to save the ocean .  If I could be anywhere ,  he sings ,  anywhere right now , I would be here .  
Thank you .
Slide into the shimmering surface between two worlds . Standing at the center of time as it uncurls . Cutting through the veil of illusion . Moving beyond past conclusions . Wondering if all my doubt and confusion will clear . If I could be anywhere , if I could be anywhere , if I could be anywhere right now , I would want to be here . Searching for the future among the things were throwing away . Trying to see the world through the junk we produce everyday . They say nothing lasts forever , but all the plastic ever made is still here . And no amount of closing our eyes will make it disappear . If I could be anywhere , if I could be anywhere , if I could be anywhere in history , I would want to be here . The Romans , the Spanish the British , the Dutch , American exceptionalism , so out of touch . The folly of empire repeating its course , imposing its will and ruling by force on and on through time . But the world cant take it very much longer . Were not going to make it unless were smarter and stronger . The world is going to shake itself free of our greed somehow . If I could be anywhere , if I could be anywhere in time , if I could be anywhere and change things , it would have to be now . They say nothing last forever , but all the plastic ever made is still here . And no amount of closing our eyes will make it disappear . And the world cant take it very much longer . Were not going to make it unless were smarter and stronger . The worlds gonna shake itself free of our greed somehow . And the world cant take it , that you can see . If the oceans dont make it , neither will we . The worlds gonna shake itself all the way free somehow . If I could be anywhere , if I could be anywhere in time , if I could be anywhere and change the outcome , it would have to be now . Thank you .
Majora Carter : Greening the ghetto
In an emotionally charged talk , MacArthur - winning activist Majora Carter details her fight for environmental justice in the South Bronx  -  -  and shows how minority neighborhoods suffer most from flawed urban policy .
If youre here today  -  -  and Im very happy that you are  -  -  youve all heard about how sustainable development will save us from ourselves . However , when were not at TED , we are often told that a real sustainability policy agenda is just not feasible , especially in large , urban areas like New York City .
And thats because most people with decision - making powers , in both the public and the private sector , really dont feel as though theyre in danger .
The reason why Im here today , in part , is because of a dog : an abandoned puppy I found back in the rain , back in 1998 .
She turned out to be a much bigger dog than Id anticipated .
When she came into my life , we were fighting against a huge waste facility planned for the East River waterfront , despite the fact that our small part of New York City already handled more than 40 percent of the entire citys commercial waste : a sewage treatment pelletizing plant , a sewage sludge plant , four power plants , the worlds largest food distribution center , as well as other industries that bring more than 60,000 diesel truck trips to the area each week .
The area also has one of the lowest ratios of parks to people in the city .
So when I was contacted by the Parks Department about a $ 10,000 seed grant initiative seed grant initiative to help develop waterfront projects , I thought they were really well - meaning , but a bit naive .
Id lived in this area all my life , and you could not get to the river because of all the lovely facilities that Id mentioned earlier .
Then , while jogging with my dog one morning , she pulled me into what I thought was just another illegal dump .
There were weeds and piles of garbage and other stuff that I wont mention here , but she kept dragging me  -  -  and lo and behold , at the end of that lot was the river .
I knew that this forgotten little street - end , abandoned like the dog that brought me there , was worth saving .
And I knew it would grow to become the proud beginnings of the community - led revitalization of the new South Bronx .
And just like my new dog , it was an idea that got bigger than Id imagined .
We garnered much support along the way .
And the Hunts Point Riverside Park became the first waterfront park that the South Bronx had had in more than 60 years .
We leveraged that $ 10,000 seed grant more than 300 times into a $ 3 million park .
And , in the fall , Im actually going to  -  -  I exchange marriage vows with my beloved . Thank you very much .
Thats him pressing my buttons back there , which he does all the time .
But those of us living in environmental justice communities are the canary in the coalmine . We feel the problems right now , and have for some time .
Environmental justice , for those of you who may not be familiar with the term , goes something like this : no community should be saddled with more environmental burdens and less environmental benefits than any other .
Unfortunately , race and class are extremely reliable indicators as to where one might find the good stuff , like parks and trees , and where one might find the bad stuff , like power plants and waste facilities .
As a black person in America , I am twice as likely as a white person to live in an area where air pollution poses the greatest risk to my health .
I am five times more likely to live within walking distance of a power plant or chemical facility  -  -  which I do .
These land - use decisions created the hostile conditions that lead to problems like obesity , diabetes and asthma .
Why would someone leave their home to go for a brisk walk in a toxic neighborhood ?
Our 27 percent obesity rate is high , even for this country , and diabetes comes with it .
One out of four South Bronx children has asthma .
Our asthma hospitalization rate is seven times higher than the national average .
These impacts are coming everyones way .
And we all pay dearly for solid waste costs , health problems associated with pollution and more odiously , the cost of imprisoning our young black and Latino men , who possess untold amounts of untapped potential .
50 percent of our residents live at or below the poverty line .
25 percent of us are unemployed . Low - income citizens often use emergency room visits as primary care .
This comes at a high cost to taxpayers and produces no proportional benefits .
Poor people are not only still poor ; they are still unhealthy .
Fortunately , there are many people like me who are striving for solutions that wont compromise the lives of low - income communities of color in the short term , and wont destroy us all in the long term .
None of us want that , and we all have that in common . So what else do we have in common ?
Well , first of all , were all incredibly good - looking  -  -   -  -  graduated high school , college , post - graduate degrees , traveled to interesting places , didnt have kids in your early teens , financially stable , never been imprisoned . OK .
Good .
But , besides being a black woman , I am different from most of you in some other ways .
I watched nearly half of the buildings in my neighborhood burn down .
My big brother Lenny fought in Vietnam , only to be gunned down a few blocks from our home .
Jesus . I grew up with a crack house across the street .
Yeah , Im a poor black child from the ghetto .
These things make me different from you .
But the things we have in common set me apart from most of the people in my community , and I am in between these two worlds , with enough of my heart to fight for justice in the other .
So how did things get so different for us ?
In the late 40s , my dad  -  -  a Pullman porter , son of a slave  -  -  bought a house in the Hunts Point section of the South Bronx , and a few years later he married my mom .
At the time , the community was a mostly white , working - class neighborhood .
My dad was not alone .
And as others like him pursued their own version of the American dream , white flight became common in the South Bronx and in many cities around the country .
Red - lining was used by banks , wherein certain sections of the city , including ours , were deemed off - limits to any sort of investment .
Many landlords believed it was more profitable to torch their buildings and collect insurance money rather than to sell under those conditions  -  -  dead or injured former tenants notwithstanding .
Hunts Point was formerly a walk - to - work community , but now residents had neither work nor home to walk to .
A national highway construction boom was added to our problems .
In New York State , Robert Moses spearheaded an aggressive highway expansion campaign .
One of its primary goals was to make it easier for residents of wealthy communities in Westchester County to go to Manhattan .
The South Bronx , which lies in between , did not stand a chance .
Residents were often given less than a months notice before their buildings were razed .
600,000 people were displaced .
The common perception was that only pimps and pushers and prostitutes were from the South Bronx .
And if you are told from your earliest days that nothing good is going to come from your community , that is bad and ugly , how could it not reflect on you ?
So now , my familys property was worthless , save for that it was our home and all we had .
And luckily for me , that home and the love inside of it , along with help from teachers , mentors and friends along the way , was enough .
Now , why is this story important ?
Because from a planning perspective , economic degradation begets environmental degradation , which begets social degradation .
The disinvestment that began in the 1960s set the stage for all the environmental injustices that were to come .
Antiquated zoning and land - use regulations are still used to this day to continue putting polluting facilities in my neighborhood .
Are these factors taken into consideration when land - use policy is decided ?
What costs are associated with these decisions ? And who pays ?
Who profits ? Does anything justify what the local community goes through ?
This was  planning   -  -  in quotes  -  -  that did not have our best interests in mind .
Once we realized that , we decided it was time to do our own planning .
That small park I told you about earlier was the first stage of building a greenway movement in the South Bronx .
I wrote a one - and - a - quarter - million dollar federal transportation grant to design the plan for a waterfront esplanade with dedicated on - street bike paths .
Physical improvements help inform public policy regarding traffic safety , the placement of the waste and other facilities , which , if done properly , dont compromise a communitys quality of life .
They provide opportunities to be more physically active , as well as local economic development .
Think bike shops , juice stands .
We secured 20 million dollars to build first - phase projects .
This is Lafayette Avenue  -  -  and as redesigned by Matthews - Nielsen landscape architects .
And once this path is constructed , itll connect the South Bronx with more than 400 acres of Randalls Island Park .
Right now were separated by about 25 feet of water , but this link will change that .
As we nurture the natural environment , its abundance will give us back even more .
We run a project called the Bronx Ecological Stewardship Training , which provides job training in the fields of ecological restorations , so that folks from our community have the skills to compete for these well - paying jobs .
Little by little , were seeding the area with green collar jobs  -  -  then the people that have both a financial and personal stake in their environment .
The Sheridan Expressway is an underutilized relic of the Robert Moses era , built with no regard for the neighborhoods that were divided by it .
Even during rush hour , it goes virtually unused .
The community created an alternative transportation plan that allows for the removal of the highway .
We have the opportunity now to bring together all the stakeholders to re - envision how this 28 acres can be better utilized for parkland , affordable housing and local economic development .
We also built the citys  -  -  New York Citys first green and cool roof demonstration project on top of our offices .
Cool roofs are highly reflective surfaces that dont absorb solar heat and pass it on to the building or atmosphere .
Green roofs are soil and living plants .
Both can be used instead of petroleum - based roofing materials that absorb heat , contribute to urban  heat island  effect and degrade under the sun , which we in turn breathe . Green roofs also retain up to 75 percent of rainfall , so they reduce a citys need to fund costly end - of - pipe solutions  -  -  which , incidentally , are often located in environmental justice communities like mine .
And they provide habitats for our little friends !
So  -  -   -  -  so cool !
Anyway , the demonstration project is a springboard for our own green roof installation business , bringing jobs and sustainable economic activity to the South Bronx .
I like that , too .
Anyway , I know Chris told us not to do pitches up here , but since I have all of your attention : we need investors . End of pitch .
Its better to ask for forgiveness than permission .
Anyway  -  -  OK . Katrina . Prior to Katrina , the South Bronx and New Orleans Ninth Ward had a lot in common . Both were largely populated by poor people of color , both hotbeds of cultural innovation : think hip - hop and jazz .
Both are waterfront communities that host both industries and residents in close proximity of one another .
In the post - Katrina era , we have still more in common .
Were at best ignored and maligned and abused , at worst , by negligent regulatory agencies , pernicious zoning and lax governmental accountability .
Neither the destruction of the Ninth Ward nor the South Bronx was inevitable .
But we have emerged with valuable lessons about how to dig ourselves out .
We are more than simply national symbols of urban blight .
Or problems to be solved by empty campaign promises of presidents come and gone .
Now will we let the Gulf Coast languish for a decade or two like the South Bronx did ?
Or will we take proactive steps and learn from the homegrown resource of grassroots activists that have been born of desperation in communities like mine ?
Now listen , I do not expect individuals , corporations or government to make the world a better place because it is right or moral .
This presentation today only represents some of what Ive been through , like a tiny little bit . Youve no clue .
But Ill tell you later if you want to know .
But  -  -  I know its the bottom line , or ones perception of it , that motivates people in the end .
Im interested in what I like to call the  triple bottom line  that sustainable development can produce .
Developments that have the potential to create positive returns for all concerned : the developers , government and the community where these projects go up .
At present , thats not happening in New York City .
And we are operating with a comprehensive urban planning deficit .
A parade of government subsidies is going to proposed big - box and stadium developments in the South Bronx , but there is scant coordination between city agencies on how to deal with the cumulative effects of increased traffic , pollution , solid waste and the impacts on open space . And their approaches to local economic and job development are so lame its not even funny .
Because on top of that , the worlds richest sports team is replacing the House That Ruth Built by destroying two well - loved community parks .
Now , well have even less than that stat I told you about earlier .
And although less than 25 percent of South Bronx residents own cars , these projects include thousands of new parking spaces , yet zip in terms of mass public transit .
Now , whats missing from the larger debate is a comprehensive cost - benefit analysis between not fixing an unhealthy , environmentally challenged community , versus incorporating structural , sustainable changes .
My agency is working closely with Columbia University and others to shine a light on these issues .
Now lets get this straight . I am not anti - development .
Ours is a city , not a wilderness preserve . And Ive embraced my inner capitalist .
You probably all have it , and if you havent , you need to .
So I dont have a problem with developers making money .
Theres enough precedent out there to show that a sustainable , community - friendly development can still make a fortune .
Fellow TEDsters Bill McDonough and Amory Lovins  -  -  both heroes of mine by the way  -  -  have shown that you can actually do that .
I do have a problem with developments that hyper - exploit politically vulnerable communities for profit .
That it continues is a shame upon us all , because we are all responsible for the future that we create .
But one of the things I do to remind myself of greater possibilities is to learn from visionaries in other cities .
This is my version of globalization .
Lets take Bogota . Poor , Latino , surrounded by runaway gun violence and drug trafficking : a reputation not unlike that of the South Bronx .
However , this city was blessed in the late 1990s with a highly influential mayor named Enrique Penalosa .
He looked at the demographics .
Few Bogatanos own cars , yet a huge portion of the citys resources was dedicated to serving them .
If youre a mayor , you can do something about that .
His administration narrowed key municipal thoroughfares from five lanes to three , outlawed parking on those streets , expanded pedestrian walkways and bike lanes , created public plazas , created one of the most efficient bus mass - transit systems in the entire world .
For his brilliant efforts , he was nearly impeached .
But as people began to see that they were being put first on issues reflecting their day - to - day lives , incredible things happened .
People stopped littering ; crime rates dropped  -  -  because the streets were alive with people .
His administration attacked several typical urban problems at one time , and on a third - world budget at that .
We have no excuse in this country . Im sorry .
But the bottom line is : their people - first agenda was not meant to penalize those who could actually afford cars , but rather to provide opportunities for all Bogatanos to participate in the citys resurgence . That development should not come at the expense of the majority of the population is still considered a radical idea here in the US .
But Bogotas example has the power to change that .
You , however , are blessed with the gift of influence .
Thats why youre here and why you value the information we exchange .
Use your influence in support of comprehensive sustainable change everywhere .
Dont just talk about it at TED . This is a nationwide policy agenda Im trying to build , and as you all know , politics are personal .
Help me make green the new black . Help me make sustainability sexy .
Make it a part of your dinner and cocktail conversations .
Help me fight for environmental and economic justice .
Support investments with a triple - bottom - line return .
Help me democratize sustainability by bringing everyone to the table and insisting that comprehensive planning can be addressed everywhere .
Oh good , glad I have a little more time !
Listen  -  -  when I spoke to Mr. Gore the other day after breakfast , I asked him how environmental justice activists were going to be included in his new marketing strategy .
His response was a grant program .
I dont think he understood that I wasnt asking for funding .
I was making him an offer .
What troubled me was that this top - down approach is still around .
Now , dont get me wrong , we need money .
But grassroots groups are needed at the table during the decision - making process .
Of the 90 percent of the energy that Mr. Gore reminded us that we waste every day , dont add wasting our energy , intelligence and hard - earned experience to that count .
I have come from so far to meet you like this .
Please dont waste me . By working together , we can become one of those small , rapidly growing groups of individuals who actually have the audacity and courage to believe that we actually can change the world .
We might have come to this conference from very , very different stations in life , but believe me , we all share one incredibly powerful thing : we have nothing to lose and everything to gain .
Ciao bellos !
Kary Mullis : A next - gen cure for killer infections
Drug - resistant bacteria kills , even in top hospitals . But now tough infections like staph and anthrax may be in for a surprise . Nobel - winning chemist Kary Mullis , who watched a friend die when powerful antibiotics failed , unveils a radical new cure that shows extraordinary promise .
So it was about four years ago , five years ago , I was sitting on a stage in Philadelphia , I think it was , with a bag similar to this .
And I was pulling a molecule out of this bag .
And I was saying , you dont know this molecule really well , but your body knows it extremely well .
And I was thinking that your body hated it , at the time , because we are very immune to this . This is called alpha - gal epitope .
And the fact that pig heart valves have lots of these on them is the reason that you cant transplant a pig heart valve into a person easily .
Actually our body doesnt hate these .
Our body loves these . It eats them .
I mean , the cells in our immune system are always hungry .
And if an antibody is stuck to one of these things on the cell , it means  thats food . 
Now , I was thinking about that and I said , you know , weve got this immune response to this ridiculous molecule that we dont make , and we see it a lot in other animals and stuff .
But I said we cant get rid of it , because all the people who tried to transplant heart valves found out you cant get rid of that immunity .
And I said , why dont you use that ?
What if I could stick this molecule , slap it onto a bacteria that was pathogenic to me , that had just invaded my lungs ?
I mean I could immediately tap into an immune response that was already there , where it was not going to take five or six days to develop it  -  -  it was going to immediately attack whatever this thing was on .
It was kind of like the same thing that happens when you , like when youre getting stopped for a traffic ticket in L.A . , and the cop drops a bag of marijuana in the back of your car , and then charges you for possession of marijuana .
Its like this very fast , very efficient way to get people off the street .
So you can take a bacteria that really doesnt make these things at all , and if you could clamp these on it really well you have it taken off the street .
And for certain bacteria we dont have really efficient ways to do that anymore .
Our antibiotics are running out .
And , I mean , the world apparently is running out too .
So probably it doesnt matter 50 years from now  -  -  streptococcus and stuff like that will be rampant  -  -  because we wont be here . But if we are  -  -  were going to need something to do with the bacteria .
So I started working with this thing , with a bunch of collaborators .
And trying to attach this to things that were themselves attached to certain specific target zones , bacteria that we dont like .
And I feel now like George Bush .
Its like  mission accomplished . 
So I might be doing something dumb , just like he was doing at the time .
But basically what I was talking about there weve now gotten to work .
And its killing bacteria . Its eating them .
This thing can be stuck , like that little green triangle up there , sort of symbolizing this right now .
You can stick this to something called a DNA aptamer .
And that DNA aptamer will attach specifically to a target that you have selected for it .
So you can find a little feature on a bacterium that you dont like , like Staphylococcus  -  -  I dont like it in particular , because it killed a professor friend of mine last year .
It doesnt respond to antibiotics . So I dont like it .
And Im making an aptamer that will have this attached to it .
That will know how to find Staph when its in your body , and will alert your immune system to go after it .
Heres what happened . See that line on the very top with the little dots ?
Thats a bunch of mice that had been poisoned by our scientist friends down in Texas , at Brooks Air Base , with anthrax .
And they had also been treated with a drug that we made that would attack anthrax in particular , and direct your immune system to it .
Youll notice they all lived , the ones on the top line  -  -  thats a 100 percent survival rate .
And they actually lived another 14 days , or 28 when we finally killed them , and took them apart and figured out what went wrong .
Why did they not die ?
And they didnt die because they didnt have anthrax anymore .
So we did it . Okay ?
Mission accomplished !
Hans Rosling : Global population growth , box by box
The worlds population will grow to 9 billion over the next 50 years  -  -  and only by raising the living standards of the poorest can we check population growth . This is the paradoxical answer that Hans Rosling unveils at TED @ Cannes using colorful new data display technology .
I still remember the day in school when our teacher told us that the world population had become three billion people , and that was in 1960 .
Im going to talk now about how world population has changed from that year and into the future , but I will not use digital technology , as Ive done during my first five TEDTalks .
Instead , I have progressed , and I am , today , launching a brand new analog teaching technology that I picked up from IKE this box .
This box contains one billion people .
And our teacher told us that the industrialized world , 1960 , had one billion people .
In the developing world , she said , they had two billion people .
And they lived away then .
There was a big gap between the one billion in the industrialized world and the two billion in the developing world .
In the industrialized world , people were healthy , educated , rich , and they had small families .
And their aspiration was to buy a car .
And in 1960 , all Swedes were saving to try to buy a Volvo like this .
This was the economic level at which Sweden was .
But in contrast to this , in the developing world , far away , the aspiration of the average family there was to have food for the day .
They were saving to be able to buy a pair of shoes .
There was an enormous gap in the world when I grew up .
And this gap between the West and the rest has created a mindset of the world , which we still use linguistically when we talk about  the West  and  the Developing World . 
But the world has changed , and its overdue to upgrade that mindset and that taxonomy of the world , and to understand it .
And thats what Im going to show you , because since 1960 what has happened in the world up to 2010 is that a staggering four billion people have been added to the world population .
Just look how many .
The world population has doubled since I went to school .
And of course , theres been economic growth in the West .
A lot of companies have happened to grow the economy , so the Western population moved over to here .
And now their aspiration is not only to have a car .
Now they want to have a holiday on a very remote destination and they want to fly .
So this is where they are today .
And the most successful of the developing countries , they have moved on , you know , and they have become emerging economies , we call them .
They are now buying cars .
And what happened a month ago was that the Chinese company , Geely , they acquired the Volvo company , and then finally the Swedes understood that something big had happened in the world .
So there they are .
And the tragedy is that the two billion over here that is struggling for food and shoes , they are still almost as poor as they were 50 years ago .
The new thing is that we have the biggest pile of billions , the three billions here , which are also becoming emerging economies , because they are quite healthy , relatively well - educated , and they already also have two to three children per woman , as those  richer also  have .
And their aspiration now is , of course , to buy a bicycle , and then later on they would like to have a motorbike also .
But this is the world we have today , no longer any gap .
But the distance from the poorest here , the very poorest , to the very richest over here is wider than ever .
But there is a continuous world from walking , biking , driving , flying  -  -  there are people on all levels , and most people tend to be somewhere in the middle .
This is the new world we have today in 2010 .
And what will happen in the future ?
Well , Im going to project into 2050 .
I was in Shanghai recently , and I listened to whats happening in China , and its pretty sure that they will catch up , just as Japan did .
All the projections  say that  this one  billion  will  only  grow with one to two or three percent .
 But this second  grows with seven , eight percent , and then they will end up here .
They will start flying .
And these lower or middle income countries , the emerging income countries , they will also forge forwards economically .
And if , but only if , we invest in the right green technology  -  -  so that we can avoid severe climate change , and energy can still be relatively cheap  -  -  then they will move all the way up here .
And they will start to buy electric cars .
This is what we will find there .
So what about the poorest two billion ?
What about the poorest two billion here ?
Will they move on ?
Well , here population  growth  comes in because there  among emerging economies  we already have two to three children per woman , family planning is widely used , and population growth is coming to an end .
Here  among the poorest  , population is growing .
So these  poorest  two billion will , in the next decades , increase to three billion , and they will thereafter increase to four billion .
There is nothing  -  -  but a nuclear war of a kind weve never seen  -  -  that can stop this  growth  from happening .
Because we already have this  growth  in process .
But if , and only if ,  the poorest  get out of poverty , they get education , they get improved child survival , they can buy a bicycle and a cell phone and come  to live  here , then population growth will stop in 2050 .
We can not have people on this level looking for food and shoes because then we get continued population growth .
And let me show you why by converting back to the old - time digital technology .
Here I have on the screen my country bubbles .
Every bubble is a country . The size is population .
The colors show the continent .
The yellow on there is the Americas ; dark blue is Africa ; brown is Europe ; green is the Middle East and this light blue is South Asia .
Thats India and this is China . Size is population .
Here I have children per woman : two children , four children , six children , eight children  -  -  big families , small families .
The year is 1960 .
And down here , child survival , the percentage of children surviving childhood up to starting school : 60 percent , 70 percent , 80 percent , 90 , and almost 100 percent , as we have today in the wealthiest and healthiest countries .
But look , this is the world my teacher talked about in 1960 : one billion Western world here  -  -  high child - survival , small families  -  -  and all the rest , the rainbow of developing countries , with very large families and poor child survival .
What has happened ? I start the world . Here we go .
Can you see , as the years pass by , child survival is increasing ?
They get soap , hygiene , education , vaccination , penicillin and then family planning . Family size is decreasing .
 When  they get up to 90 - percent child survival , then families decrease , and most of the Arab countries in the Middle East is falling down there  to small families  .
Look , Bangladesh catching up with India .
The whole emerging world joins the Western world with good child survival and small family size , but we still have the poorest billion .
Can you see the poorest billion , those  two  boxes I had over here ?
They are still up here .
And they still have a child survival of only 70 to 80 percent , meaning that if you have six children born , there will be at least four who survive to the next generation .
And the population will double in one generation .
So the only way of really getting world population  growth  to stop is to continue to improve child survival to 90 percent .
Thats why investments by Gates Foundation , UNICEF and aid organizations , together with national government in the poorest countries , are so good ; because they are actually helping us to reach a sustainable population size of the world .
We can stop at nine billion if we do the right things .
Child survival is the new green .
Its only by child survival that we will stop population growth .
And will it happen ?
Well , Im not an optimist , neither am I a pessimist .
Im a very serious  possibilist . 
Its a new category where we take emotion apart , and we just work analytically with the world .
It can be done .
We can have a much more just world .
With green technology and with investments to alleviate poverty , and global governance , the world can become like this .
And look at the position of the old West .
Remember when this blue box was all alone , leading the world , living its own life .
This will not happen  again  .
The role of the old West in the new world is to become the foundation of the modern world  -  -  nothing more , nothing less .
But its a very important role .
Do it well and get used to it .
Thank you very much .
Joe Sabia : The technology of storytelling
IPad storyteller Joe Sabia introduces us to Lothar Meggendorfer , who created a bold technology for storytelling : the pop - up book . Sabia shows how new technology has always helped us tell our own stories , from the walls of caves to his own onstage IPad .
Ladies and gentlemen , gather around .
I would love to share with you a story .
Once upon a time in 19th century Germany , there was the book .
Now during this time , the book was the king of storytelling .
It was venerable .
It was ubiquitous .
But it was a little bit boring .
Because in its 400 years of existence , storytellers never evolved the book as a storytelling device .
But then one author arrived , and he changed the game forever .
His name was Lothar , Lothar Meggendorfer .
Lothar Meggendorfer put his foot down , and he said ,  Genug ist genug ! 
He grabbed his pen , he snatched his scissors .
This man refused to fold to the conventions of normalcy and just decided to fold .
History would know Lothar Meggendorfer as  -  -  who else ?  -  -  the worlds first true inventor of the childrens pop - up book .
For this delight and for this wonder , people rejoiced .
They were happy because the story survived , and that the world would keep on spinning .
Lothar Meggendorfer wasnt the first to evolve the way a story was told , and he certainly wasnt the last .
Whether storytellers realized it or not , they were channeling Meggendorfers spirit when they moved opera to vaudville , radio news to radio theater , film to film in motion to film in sound , color , 3D , on VHS and on DVD .
There seemed to be no cure for this Meggendorferitis .
And things got a lot more fun when the Internet came around .
Because , not only could people broadcast their stories throughout the world , but they could do so using what seemed to be an infinite amount of devices .
For example , one company would tell a story of love through its very own search engine .
One Taiwanese production studio would interpret American politics in 3D .
And one man would tell the stories of his father by using a platform called Twitter to communicate the excrement his father would gesticulate .
And after all this , everyone paused ; they took a step back .
They realized that , in 6,000 years of storytelling , theyve gone from depicting hunting on cave walls to depicting Shakespeare on Facebook walls .
And this was a cause for celebration .
The art of storytelling has remained unchanged .
And for the most part , the stories are recycled .
But the way that humans tell the stories has always evolved with pure , consistent novelty .
And they remembered a man , one amazing German , every time a new storytelling device popped up next .
And for that , the audience  -  -  the lovely , beautiful audience  -  -  would live happily ever after .
Jeff Smith : Lessons in business ... from prison
Jeff Smith spent a year in prison . But what he discovered inside wasnt what he expected  -  -  he saw in his fellow inmates boundless ingenuity and business savvy . He asks : Why dont we tap this entrepreneurial potential to help ex - prisoners contribute to society once theyre back outside ?
B.J . was one of many fellow inmates who had big plans for the future .
He had a vision . When he got out , he was going to leave the dope game for good and fly straight , and he was actually working on merging his two passions into one vision .
Hed spent 10,000 dollars to buy a website that exclusively featured women having sex on top of or inside of luxury sports cars .
It was my first week in federal prison , and I was learning quickly that it wasnt what you see on TV .
In fact , it was teeming with smart , ambitious men whose business instincts were in many cases as sharp as those of the CEOs who had wined and dined me six months earlier when I was a rising star in the Missouri Senate .
Now , 95 percent of the guys that I was locked up with had been drug dealers on the outside , but when they talked about what they did , they talked about it in a different jargon , but the business concepts that they talked about werent unlike those that youd learn in a first year MBA class at Wharton : promotional incentives , you never charge a first - time user , focus - grouping new product launches , territorial expansion .
But they didnt spend a lot of time reliving the glory days .
For the most part , everyone was just trying to survive .
Its a lot harder than you might think .
Contrary to what most people think , people dont pay , taxpayers dont pay , for your life when youre in prison . Youve got to pay for your own life .
Youve got to pay for your soap , your deodorant , toothbrush , toothpaste , all of it .
And its hard for a couple of reasons .
First , everythings marked up 30 to 50 percent from what youd pay on the street , and second , you dont make a lot of money .
I unloaded trucks . That was my full - time job , unloading trucks at a food warehouse , for $ 5.25 , not an hour , but per month .
So how do you survive ?
Well , you learn to hustle , all kinds of hustles .
Theres legal hustles .
You pay everything in stamps . Those are the currency .
You charge another inmate to clean his cell .
Theres sort of illegal hustles , like you run a barbershop out of your cell .
Theres pretty illegal hustles : You run a tattoo parlor out of your own cell .
And theres very illegal hustles , which you smuggle in , you get smuggled in , drugs , pornography , cell phones , and just as in the outer world , theres a risk - reward tradeoff , so the riskier the enterprise , the more profitable it can potentially be .
You want a cigarette in prison ? Three to five dollars .
You want an old - fashioned cell phone that you flip open and is about as big as your head ? Three hundred bucks .
You want a dirty magazine ?
Well , it can be as much as 1,000 dollars .
So as you can probably tell , one of the defining aspects of prison life is ingenuity .
Whether it was concocting delicious meals from stolen scraps from the warehouse , sculpting peoples hair with toenail clippers , or constructing weights from boulders in laundry bags tied on to tree limbs , prisoners learn how to make do with less , and many of them want to take this ingenuity that theyve learned to the outside and start restaurants , barber shops , personal training businesses .
But theres no training , nothing to prepare them for that , no rehabilitation at all in prison , no one to help them write a business plan , figure out a way to translate the business concepts they intuitively grasp into legal enterprises , no access to the Internet , even .
And then , when they come out , most states dont even have a law prohibiting employers from discriminating against people with a background .
So none of us should be surprised that two out of three ex - offenders re - offend within five years .
Look , I lied to the Feds . I lost a year of my life from it .
But when I came out , I vowed that I was going to do whatever I could to make sure that guys like the ones I was locked up with didnt have to waste any more of their life than they already had .
So I hope that youll think about helping in some way .
The best thing we can do is figure out ways to nurture the entrepreneurial spirit and the tremendous untapped potential in our prisons , because if we dont , theyre not going to learn any new skills thats going to help them , and theyll be right back .
All theyll learn on the inside is new hustles .
Thank you .
Alex Laskey : How behavioral science can lower your energy bill
Whats a proven way to lower your energy costs ? Would you believe : learning what your neighbor pays . Alex Laskey shows how a quirk of human behavior can make us all better , wiser energy users , with lower bills to prove it .
How many of you have checked your email today ?
Come on , raise your hands .
How many of you are checking it right now ?
And how about finances ? Anybody check that today ?
Credit card , investment account ?
How about this week ?
Now , how about your household energy use ?
Anybody check that today ?
This week ? Last week ?
A few energy geeks spread out across the room .
Its good to see you guys .
But the rest of us  -  -  this is a room filled with people who are passionate about the future of this planet , and even we arent paying attention to the energy use thats driving climate change .
The woman in the photo with me is Harriet .
We met her on our first family vacation .
Harriets paying attention to her energy use , and she is decidedly not an energy geek .
This is the story of how Harriet came to pay attention .
This is coal , the most common source of electricity on the planet , and theres enough energy in this coal to light this bulb for more than a year .
But unfortunately , between here and here , most of that energy is lost to things like transmission leakage and heat .
In fact , only 10 percent ends up as light .
So this coal will last a little bit more than a month .
If you wanted to light this bulb for a year , youd need this much coal .
The bad news here is that , for every unit of energy we use , we waste nine .
That means theres good news , because for every unit of energy we save , we save the other nine .
So the question is , how can we get the people in this room and across the globe to start paying attention to the energy were using , and start wasting less of it ?
The answer comes from a behavioral science experiment that was run one hot summer , 10 years ago , and only 90 miles from here , in San Marcos , California .
Graduate students put signs on every door in a neighborhood , asking people to turn off their air conditioning and turn on their fans .
One quarter of the homes received a message that said , did you know you could save 54 dollars a month this summer ?
Turn off your air conditioning , turn on your fans .
Another group got an environmental message .
And still a third group got a message about being good citizens , preventing blackouts .
Most people guessed that money - saving message would work best of all .
In fact , none of these messages worked .
They had zero impact on energy consumption .
It was as if the grad students hadnt shown up at all .
But there was a fourth message , and this message simply said ,  When surveyed , 77 percent of your neighbors said that they turned off their air conditioning and turned on their fans .
Please join them . Turn off your air conditioning and turn on your fans . 
And wouldnt you know it , they did .
The people who received this message showed a marked decrease in energy consumption simply by being told what their neighbors were doing .
So what does this tell us ?
Well , if something is inconvenient , even if we believe in it , moral suasion , financial incentives , dont do much to move us  -  -  but social pressure , thats powerful stuff .
And harnessed correctly , it can be a powerful force for good .
In fact , it already is .
Inspired by this insight , my friend Dan Yates and I started a company called Opower .
We built software and partnered with utility companies who wanted to help their customers save energy .
We deliver personalized home energy reports that show people how their consumption compares to their neighbors in similar - sized homes .
Just like those effective door hangers , we have people comparing themselves to their neighbors , and then we give everyone targeted recommendations to help them save .
We started with paper , we moved to a mobile application , web , and now even a controllable thermostat , and for the last five years weve been running the largest behavioral science experiment in the world .
And its working .
Ordinary homeowners and renters have saved more than 250 million dollars on their energy bills , and were just getting started .
This year alone , in partnership with more than 80 utilities in six countries , were going to generate another two terawatt hours of electricity savings .
Now , the energy geeks in the room know two terawatt hours , but for the rest of us , two terawatt hours is more than enough energy to power every home in St . Louis and Salt Lake City combined for more than a year .
Two terawatt hours , its roughly half what the U.S . solar industry produced last year .
And two terawatt hours ? In terms of coal , wed need to burn 34 of these wheelbarrows every minute around the clock every day for an entire year to get two terawatt hours of electricity .
And were not burning anything .
Were just motivating people to pay attention and change their behavior .
But were just one company , and this is just scratching the surface .
Twenty percent of the electricity in homes is wasted , and when I say wasted , I dont mean that people have inefficient lightbulbs . They may .
I mean we leave the lights on in empty rooms , and we leave the air conditioning on when nobodys home .
Thats 40 billion dollars a year wasted on electricity that does not contribute to our well - being but does contribute to climate change .
Thats 40 billion  -  -  with a B  -  -  every year in the U.S . alone .
Thats half our coal usage right there .
Now thankfully , some of the worlds best material scientists are looking to replace coal with sustainable resources like these , and this is both fantastic and essential .
But the most overlooked resource to get us to a sustainable energy future , it isnt on this slide .
Its in this room . Its you , and its me .
And we can harness this resource with no new material science simply by applying behavioral science .
We can do it today , we know it works , and it will save us money right away .
So what are we waiting for ?
Well , in most places , utility regulation hasnt changed much since Thomas Edison .
Utilities are still rewarded when their customers waste energy .
They ought to be rewarded for helping their customers save it .
But this story is much more than about household energy use .
Take a look at the Prius .
Its efficient not only because Toyota invested in material science but because they invested in behavioral science .
The dashboard that shows drivers how much energy theyre saving in real time makes former speed demons drive more like cautious grandmothers .
Which brings us back to Harriet .
We met her on our first family vacation .
She came over to meet my young daughter , and she was tickled to learn that my daughters name is also Harriet .
She asked me what I did for a living , and I told her , I work with utilities to help people save energy .
It was then that her eyes lit up .
She looked at me , and she said ,  Youre exactly the person I need to talk to .
You see , two weeks ago , my husband and I got a letter in the mail from our utility .
It told us we were using twice as much energy as our neighbors . 
 And for the last two weeks , all we can think about , talk about , and even argue about , is what we should be doing to save energy .
We did everything that letter told us to do , and still I know there must be more .
Now Im here with a genuine expert .
Tell me . What should I do to save energy ? 
There are many experts who can help answer Harriets question .
My goal is to make sure we are all asking it .
Thank you .
Miwa Matreyek : Glorious visions in animation and performance
Using animation , projections and her own moving shadow , Miwa Matreyek performs a gorgeous , meditative piece about inner and outer discovery . Take a quiet 10 minutes and dive in . With music from Anna Oxygen , Mirah , Caroline Lufkin and Mileece .
You learned how to be a diver Put on a mask and believe Gather a dinner of shells for me Take the tank down so you can breathe Below Movements slow You are an island All the secrets until then Pried open I held them Until they were still Until they were still Until they were still Dream time , I will find you You are shady , you are new Im not so good at mornings I can see too clearly I prefer the nighttime Dark and blurry Falling night Hovering light Calling night Hovering light In the moontime I will give up my life And in the deep dreams You will find me  Excerpts from  Myth and Infrastructure   Come back .
Miwa Matreyek !
Ami Klin : A new way to diagnose autism
Early diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder can improve the lives of everyone affected , but the complex network of causes make it incredibly difficult to predict . At TEDxPeachtree , Ami Klin describes a new early detection method that uses eye - tracking technologies to gauge babies social engagement skills and reliably measure their risk of developing autism . 
I always wanted to become a walking laboratory of social engagement , to resonate other peoples feelings , thoughts , intentions , motivations , in the act of being with them .
As a scientist , I always wanted to measure that resonance , that sense of the other that happens so quickly , in the blink of an eye .
We intuit other peoples feelings .
We know the meaning of their actions even before they happen .
Were always in this stance of being the object of somebody elses subjectivity .
We do that all the time . We just cant shake it off .
Its so important that the very tools that we use to understand ourselves , to understand the world around them , is shaped by that stance .
We are social to the core .
So my journey in autism really started when I lived in a residential unit for adults with autism .
Most of those individuals had spent most of their lives in long - stay hospitals . This is a long time ago .
And for them , autism was devastating .
They had profound intellectual disabilities .
They didnt talk . But most of all , they were extraordinarily isolated from the world around them , from their environment and from the people .
In fact , at the time , if you walked into a school for individuals with autism , youd hear a lot of noise , plenty of commotion , actions , people doing things , but theyre always doing things by themselves .
So they may be looking at a light in the ceiling , or they may be isolated in the corner , or they might be engaged in these repetitive movements , in self - stimulatory movements that led them nowhere .
Extremely , extremely isolated .
Well , now we know that autism is this disruption , the disruption of this resonance that I am telling you .
These are survival skills .
These are survival skills that we inherited over many , many hundreds of thousands of years of evolution .
You see , babies are born in a state of utter fragility .
Without the caregiver , they wouldnt survive , so it stands to reason that nature would endow them with these mechanisms of survival .
They orient to the caregiver .
From the first days and weeks of life , babies prefer to hear human sounds rather than just sounds in the environment .
They prefer to look at people rather than at things , and even as theyre looking at people , they look at peoples eyes , because the eye is the window to the other persons experiences , so much so that they even prefer to look at people who are looking at them rather than people who are looking away .
Well , they orient to the caregiver .
The caregiver seeks the baby .
And its out of this mutually reinforcing choreography that a lot that is of importance to the emergence of mind , the social mind , the social brain , depends on .
We always think about autism as something that happens later on in life .
It doesnt . It begins with the beginning of life .
As babies engage with caregivers , they soon realize that , well , there is something in between the ears that is very important  -  -  its invisible , you cant see  -  -  but is really critical , and that thing is called attention .
And they learn soon enough , even before they can utter one word that they can take that attention and move somewhere in order to get things they want .
They also learn to follow other peoples gaze , because whatever people are looking at is what they are thinking about .
And soon enough , they start to learn about the meaning of things , because when somebody is looking at something or somebody is pointing at something , theyre not just getting a directional cue , they are getting the other persons meaning of that thing , the attitude , and soon enough they start building this body of meanings , but meanings that were acquired within the realm of social interaction .
Those are meanings that are acquired as part of their shared experiences with others .
Well , this is a little 15 - month - old little girl , and she has autism .
And I am coming so close to her that I am maybe two inches from her face , and shes quite oblivious to me .
Imagine if I did that to you , and I came two inches from your face .
Youd do probably two things , wouldnt you ?
You would recoil . You would call the police .
You would do something , because its literally impossible to penetrate somebodys physical space and not get a reaction .
We do so , remember , intuitively , effortlessly .
This is our body wisdom . Its not something that is mediated by our language . Our body just knows that , and weve known that for a long time .
And this is not something that happens to humans only .
It happens to some of our phylatic cousins , because if youre a monkey , and you look at another monkey , and that monkey has a higher hierarchy position than you , and that is considered to be a signal or threat , well , you are not going to be alive for long .
So something that in other species are survival mechanisms , without them they wouldnt basically live , we bring into the context of human beings , and this is what we need to simply act , act socially .
Now , she is oblivious to me , and I am so close to her , and you think , maybe she can see you , maybe she can hear you .
Well , a few minutes later , she goes to the corner of the room , and she finds a tiny little piece of candy , an M and M .
So I could not attract her attention , but something , a thing , did .
Now , most of us make a big dichotomy between the world of things and the world of people .
Now , for this girl , that division line is not so clear , and the world of people is not attracting her as much as we would like .
Now remember that we learn a great deal by sharing experiences .
Now , what she is doing right now is that her path of learning is diverging moment by moment as she is isolating herself further and further .
So we feel sometimes that the brain is deterministic , the brain determines who we are going to be .
But in fact the brain also becomes who we are , and at the same time that her behaviors are taking away from the realm of social interaction , this is whats happening with her mind and this is whats happening with her brain .
Well , autism is the most strongly genetic condition of all developmental disorders , and its a brain disorder .
Its a disorder that begins much prior to the time that the child is born .
We now know that there is a very broad spectrum of autism .
There are those individuals who are profoundly intellectually disabled , but there are those that are gifted .
There are those individuals who dont talk at all .
There are those individuals who talk too much .
There are those individuals that if you observe them in their school , you see them running the periphery fence of the school all day if you let them , to those individuals who can not stop coming to you and trying to engage you repeatedly , relentlessly , but often in an awkward fashion , without that immediate resonance .
Well , this is much more prevalent than we thought at the time .
When I started in this field , we thought that there were four individuals with autism per 10,000 , a very rare condition .
Well , now we know its more like one in 100 .
There are millions of individuals with autism all around us .
The societal cost of this condition is huge .
In the U.S . alone , maybe 35 to 80 billion dollars , and you know what ? Most of those funds are associated with adolescents and particularly adults who are severely disabled , individuals who need wrap - around services , services that are very , very intensive , and those services can cost in excess of 60 to 80,000 dollars a year .
Those are individuals who did not benefit from early treatment , because now we know that autism creates itself as they diverge in that pathway of learning that I mentioned to you .
Were we to be able to identify this condition at an earlier point , and intervene and treat , I can tell you , and this has been probably something that has changed my life in the past 10 years , this notion that we can absolutely attenuate this condition .
Also , we have a window of opportunity , because the brain is malleable for just so long , and that window of opportunity happens in the first three years of life .
Its not that that window closes . It doesnt .
But it diminishes considerably .
And yet , the median age of diagnosis in this country is still about five years , and in disadvantaged populations , the populations that dont have access to clinical services , rural populations , minorities , the age of diagnosis is later still , which is almost as if I were to tell you that we are condemning those communities to have individuals with autism whose condition is going to be more severe .
So I feel that we have a bio - ethical imperative .
The science is there , but no science is of relevance if it doesnt have an impact on the community , and we just cant afford that missed opportunity , because children with autism become adults with autism , and we feel that those things that we can do for these children , for those families , early on , will have lifetime consequences , for the child , for the family , and for the community at large .
So this is our view of autism .
There are over a hundred genes that are associated with autism . In fact , we believe that there are going to be something between 300 and 600 genes associated with autism , and genetic anomalies , much more than just genes .
And we actually have a bit of a question here , because if there are so many different causes of autism , how do you go from those liabilities to the actual syndrome ? Because people like myself , when we walk into a playroom , we recognize a child as having autism .
So how do you go from multiple causes to a syndrome that has some homogeneity ?
And the answer is , what lies in between , which is development .
And in fact , we are very interested in those first two years of life , because those liabilities dont necessarily convert into autism .
Autism creates itself .
Were we to be able to intervene during those years of life , we might attenuate for some , and God knows , maybe even prevent for others .
So how do we do that ?
How do we enter that feeling of resonance , how do we enter another persons being ?
I remember when I interacted with that 15 - month - older , that the thing that came to mind was ,  How do you come into her world ?
Is she thinking about me ? Is she thinking about others ? 
Well , its hard to do that , so we had to create the technologies . We had to basically step inside a body .
We had to see the world through her eyes .
And so in the past many years weve been building these new technologies that are based on eye tracking .
We can see moment by moment what children are engaging with .
Well , this is my colleague Warren Jones , with whom weve been building these methods , these studies , for the past 12 years , and you see there a happy five - month - older , its a five - month little boy who is going to watch things that are brought from his world , his mom , the caregiver , but also experiences that he would have were he to be in his daycare .
What we want is to embrace that world and bring it into our laboratory , but in order for us to do that , we had to create these very sophisticated measures , measures of how people , how little babies , how newborns , engage with the world , moment by moment , what is important , and what is not .
Well , we created those measures , and here , what you see is what we call a funnel of attention .
Youre watching a video .
Those frames are separated by about a second through the eyes of 35 typically developing two - year - olds , and we freeze one frame , and this is what the typical children are doing .
In this scan pass , in green here , are two - year - olds with autism .
So on that frame , the children who are typical are watching this , the emotion of expression of that little boy as hes fighting a little bit with the little girl .
What are the children with autism doing ?
They are focusing on the revolving door , opening and shutting .
Well , I can tell you that this divergence that youre seeing here doesnt happen only in our five - minute experiment .
It happens moment by moment in their real lives , and their minds are being formed , and their brains are being specialized in something other than what is happening with their typical peers .
Well , we took a construct from our pediatrician friends , the concept of growth charts .
You know , when you take a child to the pediatrician , and so you have physical height , and weight .
Well we decided that were going to create growth charts of social engagement , and we sought children from the time that they are born , and what you see here on the x - axis is two , three , four , five , six months and nine , until about the age of 24 months , and this is the percent of their viewing time that they are focusing on peoples eyes , and this is their growth chart .
They start over here , they love peoples eyes , and it remains quite stable .
It sort of goes up a little bit in those initial months .
Now , lets see whats happening with babies who became autistic .
Its something very different .
It starts way up here , but then its a free fall .
Its very much like they brought into this world the reflex that orients them to people , but it has no traction .
Its almost as if that stimulus , you , youre not exerting influence on what happens as they navigate their daily lives .
Now , we thought that those data were so powerful in a way , that we wanted to see what happened in the first six months of life , because if you interact with a two -  and a three - month - older , youd be surprised by how social those babies are .
And what we see in the first six months of life is that those two groups can be segregated very easily .
And using these kinds of measures , and many others , what we found out is that our science could , in fact , identify this condition early on .
We didnt have to wait for the behaviors of autism to emerge in the second year of life .
If we measured things that are , evolutionarily , highly conserved , and developmentally very early emerging , things that are online from the first weeks of life , we could push the detection of autism all the way to those first months , and thats what we are doing now .
Now , we can create the very best technologies and the very best methods to identify the children , but this would be for naught if we didnt have an impact on what happens in their reality in the community .
Now we want those devices , of course , to be deployed by those who are in the trenches , our colleagues , the primary care physicians , who see every child , and we need to transform those technologies into something that is going to add value to their practice , because they have to see so many children .
And we want to do that universally so that we dont miss any child , but this would be immoral if we also did not have an infrastructure for intervention , for treatment .
We need to be able to work with the families , to support the families , to manage those first years with them . We need to be able to really go from universal screening to universal access to treatment , because those treatments are going to change these childrens and those families lives .
Now , when we think about what we  can  do in those first years , I can tell you , having been in this field for so long , one feels really rejuvenated .
There is a sense that the science that one worked on can actually have an impact on realities , preventing , in fact , those experiences that I really started in my journey in this field .
I thought at the time that this was an intractable condition .
No longer . We can do a great deal of things .
And the idea is not to cure autism .
Thats not the idea .
What we want is to make sure that those individuals with autism can be free from the devastating consequences that come with it at times , the profound intellectual disabilities , the lack of language , the profound , profound isolation .
We feel that individuals with autism , in fact , have a very special perspective on the world , and we need diversity , and they can work extremely well in some areas of strength : predictable situations , situations that can be defined .
Because after all , they learn about the world almost like about it , rather than learning how to function in it .
But this is a strength , if youre working , for example , in technology .
And there are those individuals who have incredible artistic abilities .
We want them to be free of that .
We want that the next generations of individuals with autism will be able not only to express their strengths but to fulfill their promise .
Well thank you for listening to me .
Alan Siegel : Lets simplify legal jargon !
Tax forms , credit agreements , healthcare legislation : Theyre crammed with gobbledygook , says Alan Siegel , and incomprehensibly long . He calls for a simple , sensible redesign  -  -  and plain English  -  -  to make legal paperwork intelligible to the rest of us .
So , basically we have public leaders , public officials who are out of control ; they are writing bills that are unintelligible , and out of these bills are going to come maybe 40,000 pages of regulations , total complexity , which has a dramatically negative impact on our life .
If youre a veteran coming back from Iraq or Vietnam you face a blizzard of paperwork to get your benefits ; if youre trying to get a small business loan , you face a blizzard of paperwork .
What are we going to do about it ? I define simplicity as a means to achieving clarity , transparency and empathy , building humanity into communications .
Ive been simplifying things for 30 years .
I come out of the advertising and design business .
My focus is understanding you people , and how you interact with the government to get your benefits , how you interact with corporations to decide whom youre going to do business with , and how you view brands .
So , very quickly , when President Obama said ,  I dont see why we cant have a one - page , plain English consumer credit agreement . 
So , I locked myself in a room , figured out the content , organized the document , and wrote it in plain English .
Ive had this checked by the two top consumer credit lawyers in the country .
This is a real thing .
Now , I went one step further and said ,  Why do we have to stick with the stodgy lawyers and just have a paper document ? Lets go online . 
And many people might need help in computation .
Working with the Harvard Business School , youll see this example when you talk about minimum payment : If you spent 62 dollars for a meal , the longer you take to pay out that loan , you see , over a period of time using the minimum payment its 99 dollars and 17 cents .
How about that ? Do you think your bank is going to show that to people ?
But its going to work . Its more effective than just computational aids .
And what about terms like  over the limit  ?
Perhaps a stealth thing .
Define it in context . Tell people what it means .
When you put it in plain English , you almost force the institution to give the people a way , a default out of that , and not put themselves at risk .
Plain English is about changing the content .
And one of the things Im most proud of is this agreement for IBM .
Its a grid , its a calendar .
At such and such a date , IBM has responsibilities , you have responsibilities .
Received very favorably by business .
And there is some good news to report today .
Each year , one in 10 taxpayers receives a notice from the IRS .
There are 200 million letters that go out .
Running through this typical letter that they had , I ran it through my simplicity lab , its pretty unintelligible .
All the parts of the document in red are not intelligible .
We looked at doing over 1,000 letters that cover 70 percent of their transactions in plain English .
They have been tested in the laboratory .
When I run it through my lab , this heat - mapping shows everything is intelligible .
And the IRS has introduced the program .
There are a couple of things going on right now that I want to bring to your attention .
There is a lot of discussion now about a consumer financial protection agency , how to mandate simplicity .
We see all this complexity .
Its incumbent upon us , and this organization , I believe , to make clarity , transparency and empathy a national priority .
There is no way that we should allow government to communicate the way they communicate .
There is no way we should do business with companies that have agreements with stealth provisions and that are unintelligible .
So , how are we going to change the world ?
Make clarity , transparency and simplicity a national priority .
I thank you .
Rodney Brooks : Why we will rely on robots
Scaremongers play on the idea that robots will simply replace people on the job . In fact , they can become our essential collaborators , freeing us up to spend time on less mundane and mechanical challenges . Rodney Brooks points out how valuable this could be as the number of working - age adults drops and the number of retirees swells . He introduces us to Baxter , the robot with eyes that move and arms that react to touch , which could work alongside an aging population  -  -  and learn to help them at home , too .
Well , Arthur C . Clarke , a famous science fiction writer from the 1950s , said that ,  We overestimate technology in the short term , and we underestimate it in the long term . 
And I think thats some of the fear that we see about jobs disappearing from artificial intelligence and robots .
That were overestimating the technology in the short term .
But I am worried whether were going to get the technology we need in the long term .
Because the demographics are really going to leave us with lots of jobs that need doing and that we , our society , is going to have to be built on the shoulders of steel of robots in the future .
So Im scared we wont have enough robots .
But fear of losing jobs to technology has been around for a long time .
Back in 1957 , there was a Spencer Tracy , Katharine Hepburn movie .
So you know how it ended up , Spencer Tracy brought a computer , a mainframe computer of 1957 , in to help the librarians .
The librarians in the company would do things like answer for the executives ,  What are the names of Santas reindeer ? 
And they would look that up .
And this mainframe computer was going to help them with that job .
Well of course a mainframe computer in 1957 wasnt much use for that job .
The librarians were afraid their jobs were going to disappear .
But thats not what happened in fact .
The number of jobs for librarians increased for a long time after 1957 .
It wasnt until the Internet came into play , the web came into play and search engines came into play that the need for librarians went down .
And I think everyone from 1957 totally underestimated the level of technology we would all carry around in our hands and in our pockets today .
And we can just ask :  What are the names of Santas reindeer ?  and be told instantly  -  -  or anything else we want to ask .
By the way , the wages for librarians went up faster than the wages for other jobs in the U.S . over that same time period , because librarians became partners of computers .
Computers became tools , and they got more tools that they could use and become more effective during that time .
Same thing happened in offices .
Back in the old days , people used spreadsheets .
Spreadsheets were spread sheets of paper , and they calculated by hand .
But here was an interesting thing that came along .
With the revolution around 1980 of P.C . s , the spreadsheet programs were tuned for office workers , not to replace office workers , but it respected office workers as being capable of being programmers .
So office workers became programmers of spreadsheets .
It increased their capabilities .
They no longer had to do the mundane computations , but they could do something much more .
Now today , were starting to see robots in our lives .
On the left there is the PackBot from iRobot .
When soldiers came across roadside bombs in Iraq and Afghanistan , instead of putting on a bomb suit and going out and poking with a stick , as they used to do up until about 2002 , they now send the robot out .
So the robot takes over the dangerous jobs .
On the right are some TUGs from a company called Aethon in Pittsburgh .
These are in hundreds of hospitals across the U.S .
And they take the dirty sheets down to the laundry .
They take the dirty dishes back to the kitchen .
They bring the medicines up from the pharmacy .
And it frees up the nurses and the nurses aides from doing that mundane work of just mechanically pushing stuff around to spend more time with patients .
In fact , robots have become sort of ubiquitous in our lives in many ways .
But I think when it comes to factory robots , people are sort of afraid , because factory robots are dangerous to be around .
In order to program them , you have to understand six - dimensional vectors and quaternions .
And ordinary people cant interact with them .
And I think its the sort of technology thats gone wrong .
Its displaced the worker from the technology .
And I think we really have to look at technologies that ordinary workers can interact with .
And so I want to tell you today about Baxter , which weve been talking about .
And Baxter , I see , as a way  -  -  a first wave of robot that ordinary people can interact with in an industrial setting .
So Baxter is up here .
This is Chris Harbert from Rethink Robotics .
Weve got a conveyor there .
And if the lighting isnt too extreme  -  -  Ah , ah ! There it is . Its picked up the object off the conveyor .
Its going to come bring it over here and put it down .
And then itll go back , reach for another object .
The interesting thing is Baxter has some basic common sense .
By the way , whats going on with the eyes ?
The eyes are on the screen there .
The eyes look ahead where the robots going to move .
So a person thats interacting with the robot understands where its going to reach and isnt surprised by its motions .
Here Chris took the object out of its hand , and Baxter didnt go and try to put it down ; it went back and realized it had to get another one .
Its got a little bit of basic common sense , goes and picks the objects .
And Baxters safe to interact with .
You wouldnt want to do this with a current industrial robot .
But with Baxter it doesnt hurt .
It feels the force , understands that Chris is there and doesnt push through him and hurt him .
But I think the most interesting thing about Baxter is the user interface .
And so Chris is going to come and grab the other arm now .
And when he grabs an arm , it goes into zero - force gravity - compensated mode and graphics come up on the screen .
You can see some icons on the left of the screen there for what was about its right arm .
Hes going to put something in its hand , hes going to bring it over here , press a button and let go of that thing in the hand .
And the robot figures out , ah , he must mean I want to put stuff down .
It puts a little icon there .
He comes over here , and he gets the fingers to grasp together , and the robot infers , ah , you want an object for me to pick up .
That puts the green icon there .
Hes going to map out an area of where the robot should pick up the object from .
It just moves it around , and the robot figures out that was an area search .
He didnt have to select that from a menu .
And now hes going to go off and train the visual appearance of that object while we continue talking .
So as we continue here , I want to tell you about what this is like in factories .
These robots were shipping every day .
They go to factories around the country .
This is Mildred .
Mildreds a factory worker in Connecticut .
Shes worked on the line for over 20 years .
One hour after she saw her first industrial robot , she had programmed it to do some tasks in the factory .
She decided she really liked robots .
And it was doing the simple repetitive tasks that she had had to do beforehand .
Now shes got the robot doing it .
When we first went out to talk to people in factories about how we could get robots to interact with them better , one of the questions we asked them was ,  Do you want your children to work in a factory ? 
The universal answer was  No , I want a better job than that for my children . 
And as a result of that , Mildred is very typical of todays factory workers in the U.S .
Theyre older , and theyre getting older and older .
There arent many young people coming into factory work .
And as their tasks become more onerous on them , we need to give them tools that they can collaborate with , so that they can be part of the solution , so that they can continue to work and we can continue to produce in the U.S .
And so our vision is that Mildred whos the line worker becomes Mildred the robot trainer .
She lifts her game , like the office workers of the 1980s lifted their game of what they could do .
Were not giving them tools that they have to go and study for years and years in order to use .
Theyre tools that they can just learn how to operate in a few minutes .
Theres two great forces that are both volitional but inevitable .
Thats climate change and demographics .
Demographics is really going to change our world .
This is the percentage of adults who are working age .
And its gone down slightly over the last 40 years .
But over the next 40 years , its going to change dramatically , even in China .
The percentage of adults who are working age drops dramatically .
And turned up the other way , the people who are retirement age goes up very , very fast , as the baby boomers get to retirement age .
That means there will be more people with fewer social security dollars competing for services .
But more than that , as we get older we get more frail and we cant do all the tasks we used to do .
If we look at the statistics on the ages of caregivers , before our eyes those caregivers are getting older and older .
Thats happening statistically right now .
And as the number of people who are older , above retirement age and getting older , as they increase , there will be less people to take care of them .
And I think were really going to have to have robots to help us .
And I dont mean robots in terms of companions .
I mean robots doing the things that we normally do for ourselves but get harder as we get older .
Getting the groceries in from the car , up the stairs , into the kitchen .
Or even , as we get very much older , driving our cars to go visit people .
And I think robotics gives people a chance to have dignity as they get older by having control of the robotic solution .
So they dont have to rely on people that are getting scarcer to help them .
And so I really think that were going to be spending more time with robots like Baxter and working with robots like Baxter in our daily lives . And that we will  -  -  Here , Baxter , its good .
And that we will all come to rely on robots over the next 40 years as part of our everyday lives .
Thanks very much .
Marco Tempest : A magical tale
Marco Tempest spins a beautiful story of what magic is , how it entertains us and how it highlights our humanity  -  -  all while working extraordinary illusions with his hands and an augmented reality machine .
Marco Tempest : What Id like to show you today is something in the way of an experiment .
Todays its debut .
Its a demonstration of augmented reality .
And the visuals youre about to see are not prerecorded .
They are live and reacting to me in real time .
I like to think of it as a kind of technological magic .
So fingers crossed .
And keep your eyes on the big screen .
Augmented reality is the melding of the real world with computer - generated imagery .
It seems the perfect medium to investigate magic and ask , why , in a technological age , we continue to have this magical sense of wonder .
Magic is deception , but it is a deception we enjoy .
To enjoy being deceived , an audience must first suspend its disbelief .
It was the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge who first suggested this receptive state of mind .
Samuel Taylor Coleridge : I try to convey a semblance of truth in my writing to produce for these shadows of the imagination a willing suspension of disbelief that , for a moment , constitutes poetic faith .
MT : This faith in the fictional is essential for any kind of theatrical experience .
Without it , a script is just words .
Augmented reality is just the latest technology .
And sleight of hand is just an artful demonstration of dexterity .
We are all very good at suspending our disbelief .
We do it every day , while reading novels , watching television or going to the movies .
We willingly enter fictional worlds where we cheer our heroes and cry for friends we never had .
Without this ability there is no magic .
It was Jean Robert - Houdin , Frances greatest illusionist , who first recognized the role of the magician as a storyteller .
He said something that Ive posted on the wall of my studio .
Jean Robert - Houdin : A conjurer is not a juggler .
He is an actor playing the part of a magician .
MT : Which means magic is theater and every trick is a story .
The tricks of magic follow the archetypes of narrative fiction .
There are tales of creation and loss , death and resurrection , and obstacles that must be overcome .
Now many of them are intensely dramatic .
Magicians play with fire and steel , defy the fury of the buzzsaw , dare to catch a bullet or attempt a deadly escape .
But audiences dont come to see the magician die , they come to see him live .
Because the best stories always have a happy ending .
The tricks of magic have one special element .
They are stories with a twist .
Now Edward de Bono argued that our brains are pattern matching machines .
He said that magicians deliberately exploit the way their audiences think .
Edward de Bono : Stage magic relies almost wholly on the momentum error .
The audience is led to make assumptions or elaborations that are perfectly reasonable , but do not , in fact , match what is being done in front of them .
MT : In that respect , magic tricks are like jokes .
Jokes lead us down a path to an expected destination .
But when the scenario we have imagined suddenly flips into something entirely unexpected , we laugh .
The same thing happens when people watch magic tricks .
The finale defies logic , gives new insight into the problem , and audiences express their amazement with laughter .
Its fun to be fooled .
One of the key qualities of all stories is that theyre made to be shared .
We feel compelled to tell them .
When I do a trick at a party  -  -  that person will immediately pull their friend over and ask me to do it again .
They want to share the experience .
That makes my job more difficult , because , if I want to surprise them , I need to tell a story that starts the same , but ends differently  -  -  a trick with a twist on a twist .
It keeps me busy .
Now experts believe that stories go beyond our capacity for keeping us entertained .
We think in narrative structures .
We connect events and emotions and instinctively transform them into a sequence that can be easily understood .
Its a uniquely human achievement .
We all want to share our stories , whether it is the trick we saw at the party , the bad day at the office or the beautiful sunset we saw on vacation .
Today , thanks to technology , we can share those stories as never before , by email , Facebook , blogs , tweets , on TED.com .
The tools of social networking , these are the digital campfires around which the audience gathers to hear our story .
We turn facts into similes and metaphors , and even fantasies .
We polish the rough edges of our lives so that they feel whole .
Our stories make us the people we are and , sometimes , the people we want to be .
They give us our identity and a sense of community .
And if the story is a good one , it might even make us smile .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Chip Kidd : Designing books is no laughing matter . OK , it is .
Chip Kidd doesnt judge books by their cover , he creates covers that embody the book  -  -  and he does it with a wicked sense of humor . In one of the funniest talks from TED2012 , he shows the art and deep thought of his cover designs . This talk is from The Design Studio session at TED2012 , guest - curated by Chee Pearlman and David Rockwell .
Hi .
I did that for two reasons .
First of all , I wanted to give you a good visual first impression .
But the main reason I did it is that thats what happens to me when Im forced to wear a Lady Gaga skanky mic .
Im used to a stationary mic .
Its the sensible shoe of public address .
But you clamp this thing on my head , and something happens .
I just become skanky .
So Im sorry about that .
And Im already off - message .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have devoted the past 25 years of my life to designing books .
(  Yes , BOOKS . You know , the bound volumes with ink on paper .
You can not turn them off with a switch .
Tell your kids .  ) It all sort of started as a benign mistake , like penicillin .
What I really wanted was to be a graphic designer at one of the big design firms in New York City .
But upon arrival there , in the fall of 1986 , and doing a lot of interviews , I found that the only thing I was offered was to be Assistant to the Art Director at Alfred A . Knopf , a book publisher .
Now I was stupid , but not so stupid that I turned it down .
I had absolutely no idea what I was about to become part of , and I was incredibly lucky .
Soon , it had occurred to me what my job was .
My job was to ask this question :  What do the stories look like ? 
Because that is what Knopf is .
It is the story factory , one of the very best in the world .
We bring stories to the public .
The stories can be anything , and some of them are actually true .
But they all have one thing in common : They all need to look like something .
They all need a face .
Why ? To give you a first impression of what you are about to get into .
A book designer gives form to content , but also manages a very careful balance between the two .
Now , the first day of my graphic design training at Penn State University , the teacher , Lanny Sommese , came into the room and he drew a picture of an apple on the blackboard , and wrote the word  Apple  underneath , and he said ,  OK . Lesson one . Listen up . 
And he covered up the picture and he said ,  You either say this ,  and then he covered up the word ,  or you show this .
But you dont do this . 
Because this is treating your audience like a moron .
And they deserve better .
And lo and behold , soon enough , I was able to put this theory to the test on two books that I was working on for Knopf .
The first was Katharine Hepburns memoirs , and the second was a biography of Marlene Dietrich .
Now the Hepburn book was written in a very conversational style , it was like she was sitting across a table telling it all to you .
The Dietrich book was an observation by her daughter ; it was a biography .
So the Hepburn story is words and the Dietrich story is pictures , and so we did this .
So there you are .
Pure content and pure form , side by side .
No fighting , ladies .
Now , what is the story here ?
Someone is re - engineering dinosaurs by extracting their DNA from prehistoric amber .
Genius !
Now , luckily for me , I live and work in New York City , where there are plenty of dinosaurs .
So , I went to the Museum of Natural History , and I checked out the bones , and I went to the gift shop , and I bought a book .
And I was particularly taken with this page of the book , and more specifically the lower right - hand corner .
Now I took this diagram , and I put it in a Photostat machine , and I took a piece of tracing paper , and I taped it over the Photostat with a piece of Scotch tape  -  -  stop me if Im going too fast  -  -   -  -  and then I took a Rapidograph pen  -  -  explain it to the youngsters  -  -  and I just started to reconstitute the dinosaur .
I had no idea what I was doing , I had no idea where I was going , but at some point , I stopped  -  -  when to keep going would seem like I was going too far .
And what I ended up with was a graphic representation of us seeing this animal coming into being .
Were in the middle of the process .
And then I just threw some typography on it .
Very basic stuff , slightly suggestive of public park signage .
Everybody in house loved it , and so off it goes to the author .
And even back then , Michael was on the cutting edge .
That was a relief to see that pour out of the machine .
I miss Michael .
And sure enough , somebody from MCA Universal calls our legal department to see if they can maybe look into buying the rights to the image , just in case they might want to use it .
Well , they used it .
And I was thrilled .
We all know it was an amazing movie , and it was so interesting to see it go out into the culture and become this phenomenon and to see all the different permutations of it .
But not too long ago , I came upon this on the Web .
No , that is not me .
But whoever it is , I cant help but thinking they woke up one day like ,  Oh my God , that wasnt there last night . Ooooohh !
I was so wasted . 
But if you think about it , from my head to my hands to his leg .
Thats a responsibility .
And its a responsibility that I dont take lightly .
The book designers responsibility is threefold : to the reader , to the publisher and , most of all , to the author .
I want you to look at the authors book and say ,  Wow ! I need to read that . 
David Sedaris is one of my favorite writers , and the title essay in this collection is about his trip to a nudist colony .
And the reason he went is because he had a fear of his body image , and he wanted to explore what was underlying that .
For me , it was simply an excuse to design a book that you could literally take the pants off of .
But when you do , you dont get what you expect .
You get something that goes much deeper than that .
And David especially loved this design because at book signings , which he does a lot of , he could take a magic marker and do this .
Hello !
Augusten Burroughs wrote a memoir called   Dry   , and its about his time in rehab .
In his 20s , he was a hotshot ad executive , and as Mad Men has told us , a raging alcoholic .
He did not think so , however , but his coworkers did an intervention and they said ,  You are going to rehab , or you will be fired and you will die . 
Now to me , this was always going to be a typographic solution , what I would call the opposite of Type 101 .
What does that mean ?
Usually on the first day of Introduction to Typography , you get the assignment of , select a word and make it look like what it says it is . So thats Type 101 , right ?
Very simple stuff .
This is going to be the opposite of that .
I want this book to look like its lying to you , desperately and hopelessly , the way an alcoholic would .
The answer was the most low - tech thing you can imagine .
I set up the type , I printed it out on an Epson printer with water - soluble ink , taped it to the wall and threw a bucket of water at it . Presto !
Then when we went to press , the printer put a spot gloss on the ink and it really looked like it was running .
Not long after it came out , Augusten was waylaid in an airport and he was hiding out in the bookstore spying on who was buying his books .
And this woman came up to it , and she squinted , and she took it to the register , and she said to the man behind the counter ,  This ones ruined . 
And the guy behind the counter said ,  I know , lady . They all came in that way . 
Now , thats a good printing job .
A book cover is a distillation .
It is a haiku , if you will , of the story .
This particular story by Osama Tezuka is his epic life of the Buddha , and its eight volumes in all . But the best thing is when its on your shelf , you get a shelf life of the Buddha , moving from one age to the next .
All of these solutions derive their origins from the text of the book , but once the book designer has read the text , then he has to be an interpreter and a translator .
This story was a real puzzle .
This is what its about .
All right , so I got a collection of the paintings together and I looked at them and I deconstructed them and I put them back together .
And so , heres the design , right ?
And so heres the front and the spine , and its flat .
But the real story starts when you wrap it around a book and put it on the shelf .
Ahh ! We come upon them , the clandestine lovers . Lets draw them out .
Huhh ! Theyve been discovered by the sultan .
He will not be pleased .
Huhh ! And now the sultan is in danger .
And now , we have to open it up to find out whats going to happen next .
Try experiencing that on a Kindle .
Dont get me started .
Seriously .
Much is to be gained by eBooks : ease , convenience , portability .
But something is definitely lost : tradition , a sensual experience , the comfort of thingy - ness  -  -  a little bit of humanity .
Do you know what John Updike used to do the first thing when he would get a copy of one of his new books from Alfred A . Knopf ?
Hed smell it .
Then hed run his hand over the rag paper , and the pungent ink and the deckled edges of the pages .
All those years , all those books , he never got tired of it .
Now , I am all for the IPad , but trust me  -  -  smelling it will get you nowhere .
Now the Apple guys are texting ,  Develop odor emission plug - in . 
And the last story Im going to talk about is quite a story .
A woman named Aomame in 1984 Japan finds herself negotiating down a spiral staircase off an elevated highway . When she gets to the bottom , she cant help but feel that , all of a sudden , shes entered a new reality thats just slightly different from the one that she left , but very similar , but different .
And so , were talking about parallel planes of existence , sort of like a book jacket and the book that it covers .
So how do we show this ?
We go back to Hepburn and Dietrich , but now we merge them .
So were talking about different planes , different pieces of paper .
So this is on a semi - transparent piece of velum .
Its one part of the form and content .
When its on top of the paper board , which is the opposite , it forms this .
So even if you dont know anything about this book , you are forced to consider a single person straddling two planes of existence .
And the object itself invited exploration interaction , consideration and touch .
This debuted at number two on the New York Times Best Seller list .
This is unheard of , both for us the publisher , and the author .
Were talking a 900 - page book that is as weird as it is compelling , and featuring a climactic scene in which a horde of tiny people emerge from the mouth of a sleeping girl and cause a German Shepherd to explode .
Not exactly Jackie Collins .
Fourteen weeks on the Best Seller list , eight printings , and still going strong .
So even though we love publishing as an art , we very much know its a business too , and that if we do our jobs right and get a little lucky , that great art can be great business .
So thats my story . To be continued .
What does it look like ?
Yes . It can , it does and it will , but for this book designer , page - turner , dog - eared place - holder , notes in the margins - taker , ink - sniffer , the story looks like this .
Thank you .
Aicha el - Wafi + Phyllis Rodriguez : The mothers who found forgiveness , friendship
Phyllis Rodriguez and Aicha el - Wafi have a powerful friendship born of unthinkable loss . Rodriguez son was killed in the World Trade Center attacks on September 11 , 2001 ; el - Wafis son Zacarias Moussaoui was convicted of a role in those attacks and is serving a life sentence . In hoping to find peace , these two moms have come to understand and respect one another .
Phyllis Rodriguez : We are here today because of the fact that we have what most people consider an unusual friendship .
And it is .
And yet , it feels natural to us now .
I first learned that my son had been in the World Trade Center on the morning of September 11th , 2001 .
We didnt know if he had perished yet until 36 hours later .
At the time , we knew that it was political .
We were afraid of what our country was going to do in the name of our son  -  -  my husband , Orlando , and I and our family .
And when I saw it  -  -  and yet , through the shock , the terrible shock , and the terrible explosion in our lives , literally , we were not vengeful .
And a couple of weeks later when Zacarias Moussaoui was indicted on six counts of conspiracy to commit terrorism , and the U.S . government called for a death penalty for him , if convicted , my husband and I spoke out in opposition to that , publicly .
Through that and through human rights groups , we were brought together with several other victims families .
When I saw Aicha in the media , coming over when her son was indicted , and I thought ,  What a brave woman .
Someday I want to meet that woman when Im stronger . 
I was still in deep grief ; I knew I didnt have the strength .
I knew I would find her someday , or we would find each other .
Because , when people heard that my son was a victim , I got immediate sympathy .
But when people learned what her son was accused of , she didnt get that sympathy .
But her suffering is equal to mine .
So we met in November 2002 , and Aicha will now tell you how that came about .
Aicha el - Wafi : Good afternoon , ladies and gentlemen .
I am the mother of Zacarias Moussaoui .
And I asked the Organization of Human Rights to put me in touch with the parents of the victims .
So they introduced me to five families .
And I saw Phyllis , and I watched her .
She was the only mother in the group .
The others were brothers , sisters .
And I saw in her eyes that she was a mother , just like me .
I suffered a lot as a mother .
I was married when I was 14 .
I lost a child when I was 15 , a second child when I was 16 .
So the story with Zacarias was too much really .
And I still suffer , because my son is like hes buried alive .
I know she really cried for her son .
But she knows where he is .
My son , I dont know where he is .
I dont know if hes alive . I dont know if hes tortured .
I dont know what happened to him .
So thats why I decided to tell my story , so that my suffering is something positive for other women .
For all the women , all the mothers that give life , you can give back , you can change .
Its up to us women , because we are women , because we love our children .
We must be hand - in - hand and do something together .
Its not against women , its for us , for us women , for our children .
I talk against violence , against terrorism .
I go to schools to talk to young , Muslim girls so they dont accept to be married against their will very young .
So if I can save one of the young girls , and avoid that they get married and suffer as much as I did , well this is something good .
This is why Im here in front of you .
PR : I would like to say that I have learned so much from Aicha , starting with that day we had our very first meeting with other family members  -  -  which was a very private meeting with security , because it was November 2002 , and , frankly , we were afraid of the super - patriotism of that time in the country  -  -  those of us family members .
But we were all so nervous .
 Why does she want to meet us ? 
And then she was nervous .
 Why did we want to meet her ? 
What did we want from each other ?
Before we knew each others names , or anything , we had embraced and wept .
Then we sat in a circle with support , with help , from people experienced in this kind of reconciliation .
And Aicha started , and she said ,  I dont know if my son is guilty or innocent , but I want to tell you how sorry I am for what happened to your families .
I know what it is to suffer , and I feel that if there is a crime , a person should be tried fairly and punished . 
But she reached out to us in that way , and it was , Id like to say , it was an ice - breaker .
And what happened then is we all told our stories , and we all connected as human beings .
By the end of the afternoon  -  -  it was about three hours after lunch  -  -  wed felt as if wed known each other forever .
Now what I learned from her , is a woman , not only who could be so generous under these present circumstances and what it was then , and what was being done to her son , but the life shes had .
I never had met someone with such a hard life , from such a totally different culture and environment from my own .
And I feel that we have a special connection , which I value very much .
And I think its all about being afraid of the other , but making that step and then realizing ,  Hey , this wasnt so hard .
Who else can I meet that I dont know , or that Im so different from ? 
So , Aicha , do you have a couple of words for conclusion ?
Because our time is up .
AW : I wanted to say that we have to try to know other people , the other .
You have to be generous , and your hearts must be generous , your mind must be generous .
You must be tolerant .
You have to fight against violence .
And I hope that someday well all live together in peace and respecting each other .
This is what I wanted to say .
Graham Hill : Why Im a weekday vegetarian
We all know the arguments that being vegetarian is better for the environment and for the animals  -  -  but in a carnivorous culture , it can be hard to make the change . Graham Hill has a powerful , pragmatic suggestion : Be a weekday veg .
About a year ago , I asked myself a question :  Knowing what I know , why am I not a vegetarian ? 
After all , Im one of the green guys : I grew up with hippie parents in a log cabin .
I started a site called TreeHugger  -  -  I care about this stuff .
I knew that eating a mere hamburger a day can increase my risk of dying by a third .
Cruelty : I knew that the 10 billion animals we raise each year for meat are raised in factory farm conditions that we , hypocritically , wouldnt even consider for our own cats , dogs and other pets .
Environmentally , meat , amazingly , causes more emissions than all of transportation combined : cars , trains , planes , buses , boats , all of it .
And beef production uses 100 times the water that most vegetables do .
I also knew that Im not alone .
We as a society are eating twice as much meat as we did in the 50s .
So what was once the special little side treat now is the main , much more regular .
So really , any of these angles should have been enough to convince me to go vegetarian .
Yet , there I was  -  -  chk , chk , chk  -  -  tucking into a big old steak .
So why was I stalling ?
I realized that what I was being pitched was a binary solution .
It was either youre a meat eater or youre a vegetarian , and I guess I just wasnt quite ready .
Imagine your last hamburger .
So my common sense , my good intentions , were in conflict with my taste buds .
And Id commit to doing it later , and not surprisingly , later never came .
Sound familiar ?
So I wondered , might there be a third solution ?
And I thought about it , and I came up with one .
Ive been doing it for the last year , and its great .
Its called weekday veg .
The name says it all : Nothing with a face Monday through Friday .
On the weekend , your choice .
Simple .
If you want to take it to the next level , remember , the major culprits in terms of environmental damage and health are red and processed meats .
So you want to swap those out with some good , sustainably harvested fish .
Its structured , so it ends up being simple to remember , and its okay to break it here and there .
After all , cutting five days a week is cutting 70 percent of your meat intake .
The program has been great , weekday veg .
My footprints smaller , Im lessening pollution , I feel better about the animals , Im even saving money .
Best of all , Im healthier , I know that Im going to live longer , and Ive even lost a little weight .
So , please ask yourselves , for your health , for your pocketbook , for the environment , for the animals : Whats stopping you from giving weekday veg a shot ?
After all , if all of us ate half as much meat , it would be like half of us were vegetarians .
Thank you .
Taryn Simon : Photographs of secret sites
Taryn Simon exhibits her startling take on photography  -  -  to reveal worlds and people we would never see otherwise . She shares two projects : one documents otherworldly locations typically kept secret from the public , the other involves haunting portraits of men convicted for crimes they did not commit .
Okay , so 90 percent of my photographic process is , in fact , not photographic .
It involves a campaign of letter writing , research and phone calls to access my subjects , which can range from Hamas leaders in Gaza to a hibernating black bear in its cave in West Virginia .
And oddly , the most notable letter of rejection I ever received came from Walt Disney World , a seemingly innocuous site .
And it read  -  -  Im just going to read a key sentence :  Especially during these violent times , I personally believe that the magical spell cast upon guests who visit our theme parks is particularly important to protect and helps to provide them with an important fantasy they can escape to . 
Photography threatens fantasy .
They didnt want to let my camera in because it confronts constructed realities , myths and beliefs , and provides what appears to be evidence of a truth .
But there are multiple truths attached to every image , depending on the creators intention , the viewer and the context in which it is presented .
Over a five year period following September 11th , when the American media and government were seeking hidden and unknown sites beyond its borders , most notably weapons of mass destruction , I chose to look inward at that which was integral to Americas foundation , mythology and daily functioning .
I wanted to confront the boundaries of the citizen , self - imposed and real , and confront the divide between privileged and public access to knowledge .
It was a critical moment in American history and global history where one felt they didnt have access to accurate information .
And I wanted to see the center with my own eyes , but what I came away with is a photograph .
And its just another place from which to observe , and the understanding that there are no absolute , all - knowing insiders .
And the outsider can never really reach the core .
Im going to run through some of the photographs in this series .
Its titled ,  An American Index of the Hidden and Unfamiliar ,  and its comprised of nearly 70 images .
In this context Ill just show you a few .
This is a nuclear waste storage and encapsulation facility at Hanford site in Washington State , where there are over 1,900 stainless steel capsules containing nuclear waste submerged in water .
A human standing in front of an unprotected capsule would die instantly .
And I found one section amongst all of these that actually resembled the outline of the United States of America , which you can see here .
And a big part of the work that is sort of absent in this context is text .
So I create these two poles .
Every image is accompanied with a very detailed factual text .
And what Im most interested in is the invisible space between a text and its accompanying image , and how the image is transformed by the text and the text by the image .
So , at best , the image is meant to float away into abstraction and multiple truths and fantasy .
And then the text functions as this cruel anchor that kind of nails it to the ground .
But in this context Im just going to read an abridged version of those texts .
This is a cryopreservation unit , and it holds the bodies of the wife and mother of cryonics pioneer Robert Ettinger , who hoped to be awoken one day to extended life in good health , with advancements in science and technology , all for the cost of 35 thousand dollars , for forever .
This is a 21 - year - old Palestinian woman undergoing hymenoplasty .
Hymenoplasty is a surgical procedure which restores the virginal state , allowing her to adhere to certain cultural expectations regarding virginity and marriage .
So it essentially reconstructs a ruptured hymen , allowing her to bleed upon having sexual intercourse , to simulate the loss of virginity .
This is a jury simulation deliberation room , and you can see beyond that two - way mirror jury advisers standing in a room behind the mirror .
And they observe deliberations after mock trial proceedings so that they can better advise their clients how to adjust their trial strategy to have the outcome that theyre hoping for .
This process costs 60,000 dollars .
This is a U.S . Customs and Border Protection room , a contraband room , at John F . Kennedy International Airport .
On that table you can see 48 hours worth of seized goods from passengers entering in to the United States .
There is a pigs head and African cane rats .
And part of my photographic work is Im not just documenting whats there .
I do take certain liberties and intervene .
And in this I really wanted it to resemble an early still - life painting , so I spent some time with the smells and items .
This is the exhibited art on the walls of the CIA in Langley , Virginia , their original headquarters building .
And the CIA has had a long history with both covert and public cultural diplomacy efforts .
And its speculated that some of their interest in the arts was designed to counter Soviet communism and promote what it considered to be pro - American thoughts and aesthetics .
And one of the art forms that elicited the interest of the agency , and had thus come under question , is abstract expressionism .
This is the Forensic Anthropology Research Facility , and on a six acre plot there are approximately 75 cadavers at any given time that are being studied by forensic anthropologists and researchers who are interested in monitoring a rate of corpse decomposition .
And in this particular photograph the body of a young boy has been used to reenact a crime scene .
This is the only federally funded site where it is legal to cultivate cannabis for scientific research in the United States .
Its a research crop marijuana grow room .
And part of the work that I hope for is that there is a sort of disorienting entropy where you cant find any discernible formula in how these things  -  -  they sort of awkwardly jump from government to science to religion to security  -  -  and you cant completely understand how information is being distributed .
These are transatlantic submarine communication cables that travel across the floor of the Atlantic Ocean , connecting North America to Europe .
They carry over 60 million simultaneous voice conversations , and in a lot of the government and technology sites there was just this very apparent vulnerability .
This one is almost humorous because it feels like I could just snip all of that conversation in one easy cut .
But stuff did feel like it could have been taken 30 or 40 years ago , like it was locked in the Cold War era and hadnt necessarily progressed .
This is a Braille edition of Playboy magazine .
And this is ... a division of the Library of Congress produces a free national library service for the blind and visually impaired , and the publications they choose to publish are based on reader popularity .
And Playboy is always in the top few .
But youd be surprised , they dont do the photographs . Its just the text .
This is an avian quarantine facility where all imported birds coming into America are required to undergo a 30 - day quarantine , where they are tested for diseases including Exotic Newcastle Disease and Avian Influenza .
This film shows the testing of a new explosive fill on a warhead .
And the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida is responsible for the deployment and testing of all air - delivered weaponry coming from the United States .
And the film was shot on 72 millimeter , government - issue film .
And that red dot is a marking on the government - issue film .
All living white tigers in North America are the result of selective inbreeding  -  -  that would be mother to son , father to daughter , sister to brother  -  -  to allow for the genetic conditions that create a salable white tiger .
Meaning white fur , ice blue eyes , a pink nose .
And the majority of these white tigers are not born in a salable state and are killed at birth .
Its a very violent process that is little known .
And the white tiger is obviously celebrated in several forms of entertainment .
Kenny was born . He actually made it to adulthood .
He has since passed away , but was mentally retarded and suffers from severe bone abnormalities .
This , on a lighter note , is at George Lucas personal archive .
This is the Death Star .
And its shown here in its true orientation .
In the context of  Star Wars : Return of the Jedi ,  its mirror image is presented .
They flip the negative .
And you can see the photoetched brass detailing , and the painted acrylic facade .
In the context of the film , this is a deep - space battle station of the Galactic Empire , capable of annihilating planets and civilizations , and in reality it measures about four feet by two feet .
This is at Fort Campbell in Kentucky .
Its a Military Operations on Urbanized Terrain site .
Essentially theyve simulated a city for urban combat , and this is one of the structures that exists in that city .
Its called the World Church of God .
Its supposed to be a generic site of worship .
And after I took this photograph , they constructed a wall around the World Church of God to mimic the set - up of mosques in Afghanistan or Iraq .
And I worked with Mehta Vihar who creates virtual simulations for the army for tactical practice .
And we put that wall around the World Church of God , and also used the characters and vehicles and explosions that are offered in the video games for the army .
And I put them into my photograph .
This is live HIV virus at Harvard Medical School , who is working with the U.S . Government to develop sterilizing immunity .
And Alhurra is a U.S . Government -  sponsored Arabic language television network that distributes news and information to over 22 countries in the Arab world .
It runs 24 hours a day , commercial free .
However , its illegal to broadcast Alhurra within the United States .
And in 2004 , they developed a channel called Alhurra Iraq , which specifically deals with events occurring in Iraq and is broadcast to Iraq .
Now Im going to move on to another project I did .
Its titled  The Innocents . 
And for the men in these photographs , photography had been used to create a fantasy .
Contradicting its function as evidence of a truth , in these instances it furthered the fabrication of a lie .
I traveled across the United States photographing men and women who had been wrongfully convicted of crimes they did not commit , violent crimes .
I investigate photographys ability to blur truth and fiction , and its influence on memory , which can lead to severe , even lethal consequences .
For the men in these photographs , the primary cause of their wrongful conviction was mistaken identification .
A victim or eyewitness identifies a suspected perpetrator through law enforcements use of images .
But through exposure to composite sketches , Polaroids , mug shots and line - ups , eyewitness testimony can change .
Ill give you an example from a case .
A woman was raped and presented with a series of photographs from which to identify her attacker .
She saw some similarities in one of the photographs , but couldnt quite make a positive identification .
Days later , she is presented with another photo array of all new photographs , except that one photograph that she had some draw to from the earlier array is repeated in the second array .
And a positive identification is made because the photograph replaced the memory , if there ever was an actual memory .
Photography offered the criminal justice system a tool that transformed innocent citizens into criminals , and the criminal justice system failed to recognize the limitations of relying on photographic identifications .
Frederick Daye , who is photographed at his alibi location , where 13 witnesses placed him at the time of the crime .
He was convicted by an all - white jury of rape , kidnapping and vehicle theft .
And he served 10 years of a life sentence .
Now DNA exonerated Frederick and it also implicated another man who was serving time in prison .
But the victim refused to press charges because she claimed that law enforcement had permanently altered her memory through the use of Fredericks photograph .
Charles Fain was convicted of kidnapping , rape and murder of a young girl walking to school .
He served 18 years of a death sentence .
I photographed him at the scene of the crime at the Snake River in Idaho .
And I photographed all of the wrongfully convicted at sites that came to particular significance in the history of their wrongful conviction .
The scene of arrest , the scene of misidentification , the alibi location .
And here , the scene of the crime , its this place to which hes never been , but changed his life forever .
So photographing there , I was hoping to highlight the tenuous relationship between truth and fiction , in both his life and in photography .
Calvin Washington was convicted of capital murder .
He served 13 years of a life sentence in Waco , Texas .
Larry Mayes , I photographed at the scene of arrest , where he hid between two mattresses in Gary , Indiana , in this very room to hide from the police .
He ended up serving 18 and a half years of an 80 year sentence for rape and robbery .
The victim failed to identify Larry in two live lineups and then made a positive identification , days later , from a photo array .
Larry Youngblood served eight years of a 10 and half year sentence in Arizona for the abduction and repeated sodomizing of a 10 year old boy at a carnival .
He is photographed at his alibi location .
Ron Williamson . Ron was convicted of the rape and murder of a barmaid at a club , and served 11 years of a death sentence .
I photographed Ron at a baseball field because he had been drafted to the Oakland As to play professional baseball just before his conviction .
And the states key witness in Rons case was , in the end , the actual perpetrator .
Ronald Jones served eight years of a death sentence for rape and murder of a 28 - year - old woman .
I photographed him at the scene of arrest in Chicago .
William Gregory was convicted of rape and burglary .
He served seven years of a 70 year sentence in Kentucky .
Timothy Durham , who I photographed at his alibi location where 11 witnesses placed him at the time of the crime , was convicted of 3.5 years of a 3220 year sentence , for several charges of rape and robbery .
He had been misidentified by an 11 - year - old victim .
Troy Webb is photographed here at the scene of the crime in Virginia .
He was convicted of rape , kidnapping and robbery , and served seven years of a 47 year sentence .
Troys picture was in a photo array that the victim tentatively had some draw toward , but said he looked too old .
The police went and found a photograph of Troy Webb from four years earlier , which they entered into a photo array days later , and he was positively identified .
Now Im going to leave you with a self portrait .
And it reiterates that distortion is a constant , and our eyes are easily deceived .
Thats it . Thank you .
Ed Boyden : A light switch for neurons
Ed Boyden shows how , by inserting genes for light - sensitive proteins into brain cells , he can selectively activate or de - activate specific neurons with fiber - optic implants . With this unprecedented level of control , hes managed to cure mice of analogs of PTSD and certain forms of blindness . On the horizon : neural prosthetics . Session host Juan Enriquez leads a brief post - talk Q and A .
Think about your day for a second .
You woke up , felt fresh air on your face as you walked out the door , encountered new colleagues and had great discussions , and felt in awe when you found something new .
But I bet theres something you didnt think about today  -  -  something so close to home that you probably dont think about it very often at all .
And thats that all the sensations , feelings , decisions and actions are mediated by the computer in your head called the brain .
Now the brain may not look like much from the outside  -  -  a couple pounds of pinkish - gray flesh , amorphous  -  -  but the last hundred years of neuroscience have allowed us to zoom in on the brain , and to see the intricacy of what lies within .
And theyve told us that this brain is an incredibly complicated circuit made out of hundreds of billions of cells called neurons .
Now unlike a human - designed computer , where theres a fairly small number of different parts  -  -  we know how they work , because we humans designed them  -  -  the brain is made out of thousands of different kinds of cells , maybe tens of thousands .
They come in different shapes ; theyre made out of different molecules .
And they project and connect to different brain regions , and they also change different ways in different disease states .
Lets make it concrete .
Theres a class of cells , a fairly small cell , an inhibitory cell , that quiets its neighbors .
Its one of the cells that seems to be atrophied in disorders like schizophrenia .
Its called the basket cell .
And this cell is one of the thousands of kinds of cell that we are learning about .
New ones are being discovered everyday .
As just a second example : these pyramidal cells , large cells , they can span a significant fraction of the brain .
Theyre excitatory .
And these are some of the cells that might be overactive in disorders such as epilepsy .
Every one of these cells is an incredible electrical device .
They receive input from thousands of upstream partners and compute their own electrical outputs , which then , if they pass a certain threshold , will go to thousands of downstream partners .
And this process , which takes just a millisecond or so , happens thousands of times a minute in every one of your 100 billion cells , as long as you live and think and feel .
So how are we going to figure out what this circuit does ?
Ideally , we could go through the circuit and turn these different kinds of cell on and off and see whether we could figure out which ones contribute to certain functions and which ones go wrong in certain pathologies .
If we could activate cells , we could see what powers they can unleash , what they can initiate and sustain .
If we could turn them off , then we could try and figure out what theyre necessary for .
And thats a story Im going to tell you about today .
And honestly , where weve gone through over the last 11 years , through an attempt to find ways of turning circuits and cells and parts and pathways of the brain on and off , both to understand the science and also to confront some of the issues that face us all as humans .
Now before I tell you about the technology , the bad news is that a significant fraction of us in this room , if we live long enough , will encounter , perhaps , a brain disorder .
Already , a billion people have had some kind of brain disorder that incapacitates them , and the numbers dont do it justice though .
These disorders  -  -  schizophrenia , Alzheimers , depression , addiction  -  -  they not only steal our time to live , they change who we are .
They take our identity and change our emotions and change who we are as people .
Now in the 20th century , there was some hope that was generated through the development of pharmaceuticals for treating brain disorders , and while many drugs have been developed that can alleviate symptoms of brain disorders , practically none of them can be considered to be cured .
And part of thats because were bathing the brain in the chemical .
This elaborate circuit made out of thousands of different kinds of cell is being bathed in a substance .
Thats also why , perhaps , most of the drugs , and not all , on the market can present some kind of serious side effect too .
Now some people have gotten some solace from electrical stimulators that are implanted in the brain .
And for Parkinsons disease , Cochlear implants , these have indeed been able to bring some kind of remedy to people with certain kinds of disorder .
But electricity also will go in all directions  -  -  the path of least resistance , which is where that phrase , in part , comes from .
And it also will affect normal circuits as well as the abnormal ones that you want to fix .
So again , were sent back to the idea of ultra - precise control .
Could we dial - in information precisely where we want it to go ?
So when I started in neuroscience 11 years ago , I had trained as an electrical engineer and a physicist , and the first thing I thought about was , if these neurons are electrical devices , all we need to do is to find some way of driving those electrical changes at a distance .
If we could turn on the electricity in one cell , but not its neighbors , that would give us the tool we need to activate and shut down these different cells , figure out what they do and how they contribute to the networks in which theyre embedded .
And also it would allow us to have the ultra - precise control we need in order to fix the circuit computations that have gone awry .
Now how are we going to do that ?
Well there are many molecules that exist in nature , which are able to convert light into electricity .
You can think of them as little proteins that are like solar cells .
If we can install these molecules in neurons somehow , then these neurons would become electrically drivable with light .
And their neighbors , which dont have the molecule , would not .
Theres one other magic trick you need to make this all happen , and thats the ability to get light into the brain .
And to do that  -  -  the brain doesnt feel pain  -  -  you can put  -  -  taking advantage of all the effort thats gone into the Internet and communications and so on  -  -  optical fibers connected to lasers that you can use to activate , in animal models for example , in pre - clinical studies , these neurons and to see what they do .
So how do we do this ?
Around 2004 , in collaboration with Gerhard Nagel and Karl Deisseroth , this vision came to fruition .
Theres a certain alga that swims in the wild , and it needs to navigate towards light in order to photosynthesize optimally .
And it senses light with a little eye - spot , which works not unlike how our eye works .
In its membrane , or its boundary , it contains little proteins that indeed can convert light into electricity .
So these molecules are called channelrhodopsins .
And each of these proteins acts just like that solar cell that I told you about .
When blue light hits it , it opens up a little hole and allows charged particles to enter the eye - spot , and that allows this eye - spot to have an electrical signal just like a solar cell charging up a battery .
So what we need to do is to take these molecules and somehow install them in neurons .
And because its a protein , its encoded for in the DNA of this organism .
So all weve got to do is take that DNA , put it into a gene therapy vector , like a virus , and put it into neurons .
So it turned out that this was a very productive time in gene therapy , and lots of viruses were coming along .
So this turned out to be very simple to do .
And early in the morning one day in the summer of 2004 , we gave it a try , and it worked on the first try .
You take this DNA and you put it into a neuron .
The neuron uses its natural protein - making machinery to fabricate these little light - sensitive proteins and install them all over the cell , like putting solar panels on a roof , and the next thing you know , you have a neuron which can be activated with light .
So this is very powerful .
One of the tricks you have to do is to figure out how to deliver these genes to the cells that you want and not all the other neighbors .
And you can do that ; you can tweak the viruses so they hit just some cells and not others .
And theres other genetic tricks you can play in order to get light - activated cells .
This field has now come to be known as optogenetics .
And just as one example of the kind of thing you can do , you can take a complex network , use one of these viruses to deliver the gene just to one kind of cell in this dense network .
And then when you shine light on the entire network , just that cell type will be activated .
So for example , lets sort of consider that basket cell I told you about earlier  -  -  the one thats atrophied in schizophrenia and the one that is inhibitory .
If we can deliver that gene to these cells  -  -  and theyre not going to be altered by the expression of the gene , of course  -  -  and then flash blue light over the entire brain network , just these cells are going to be driven .
And when the light turns off , these cells go back to normal , so they dont seem to be averse against that .
Not only can you use this to study what these cells do , what their power is in computing in the brain , but you can also use this to try to figure out  -  -  well maybe we could jazz up the activity of these cells , if indeed theyre atrophied .
Now I want to tell you a couple of short stories about how were using this , both at the scientific , clinical and pre - clinical levels .
One of the questions weve confronted is , what are the signals in the brain that mediate the sensation of reward ?
Because if you could find those , those would be some of the signals that could drive learning .
The brain will do more of whatever got that reward .
And also these are signals that go awry in disorders such as addiction .
So if we could figure out what cells they are , we could maybe find new targets for which drugs could be designed or screened against , or maybe places where electrodes could be put in for people who have very severe disability .
So to do that , we came up with a very simple paradigm in collaboration with the Fiorella group , where one side of this little box , if the animal goes there , the animal gets a pulse of light in order to make different cells in the brain sensitive to light .
So if these cells can mediate reward , the animal should go there more and more .
And so thats what happens .
This animals going to go to the right - hand side and poke his nose there , and he gets a flash of blue light every time he does that .
And hell do that hundreds and hundreds of times .
These are the dopamine neurons , which some of you may have heard about , in some of the pleasure centers in the brain .
Now weve shown that a brief activation of these is enough , indeed , to drive learning .
Now we can generalize the idea .
Instead of one point in the brain , we can devise devices that span the brain , that can deliver light into three - dimensional patterns  -  -  arrays of optical fibers , each coupled to its own independent miniature light source .
And then we can try to do things in vivo that have only been done to - date in a dish  -  -  like high - throughput screening throughout the entire brain for the signals that can cause certain things to happen .
Or that could be good clinical targets for treating brain disorders .
And one story I want to tell you about is how can we find targets for treating post - traumatic stress disorder  -  -  a form of uncontrolled anxiety and fear .
And one of the things that we did was to adopt a very classical model of fear .
This goes back to the Pavlovian days .
Its called Pavlovian fear conditioning  -  -  where a tone ends with a brief shock .
The shock isnt painful , but its a little annoying .
And over time  -  -  in this case , a mouse , which is a good animal model , commonly used in such experiments  -  -  the animal learns to fear the tone .
The animal will react by freezing , sort of like a deer in the headlights .
Now the question is , what targets in the brain can we find that allow us to overcome this fear ?
So what we do is we play that tone again after its been associated with fear .
But we activate targets in the brain , different ones , using that optical fiber array I told you about in the previous slide , in order to try and figure out which targets can cause the brain to overcome that memory of fear .
And so this brief video shows you one of these targets that were working on now .
This is an area in the prefrontal cortex , a region where we can use cognition to try to overcome aversive emotional states .
And the animals going to hear a tone  -  -  and a flash of light occurred there .
Theres no audio on this , but you can see the animals freezing .
This tone used to mean bad news .
And theres a little clock in the lower left - hand corner , so you can see the animal is about two minutes into this .
And now this next clip is just eight minutes later .
And the same tone is going to play , and the light is going to flash again .
Okay , there it goes . Right now .
And now you can see , just 10 minutes into the experiment , that weve equipped the brain by photoactivating this area to overcome the expression of this fear memory .
Now over the last couple of years , weve gone back to the tree of life because we wanted to find ways to turn circuits in the brain off .
If we could do that , this could be extremely powerful .
If you can delete cells just for a few milliseconds or seconds , you can figure out what necessary role they play in the circuits in which theyre embedded .
And weve now surveyed organisms from all over the tree of life  -  -  every kingdom of life except for animals , we see slightly differently .
And we found all sorts of molecules , theyre called halorhodopsins or archaerhodopsins , that respond to green and yellow light .
And they do the opposite thing of the molecule I told you about before with the blue light activator channelrhodopsin .
Lets give an example of where we think this is going to go .
Consider , for example , a condition like epilepsy , where the brain is overactive .
Now if drugs fail in epileptic treatment , one of the strategies is to remove part of the brain .
But thats obviously irreversible , and there could be side effects .
What if we could just turn off that brain for a brief amount of time , until the seizure dies away , and cause the brain to be restored to its initial state  -  -  sort of like a dynamical system thats being coaxed down into a stable state .
So this animation just tries to explain this concept where we made these cells sensitive to being turned off with light , and we beam light in , and just for the time it takes to shut down a seizure , were hoping to be able to turn it off .
And so we dont have data to show you on this front , but were very excited about this .
Now I want to close on one story , which we think is another possibility  -  -  which is that maybe these molecules , if you can do ultra - precise control , can be used in the brain itself to make a new kind of prosthetic , an optical prosthetic .
I already told you that electrical stimulators are not uncommon .
Seventy - five thousand people have Parkinsons deep - brain stimulators implanted .
Maybe 100,000 people have Cochlear implants , which allow them to hear .
Theres another thing , which is youve got to get these genes into cells .
And new hope in gene therapy has been developed because viruses like the adeno - associated virus , which probably most of us around this room have , and it doesnt have any symptoms , which have been used in hundreds of patients to deliver genes into the brain or the body .
And so far , there have not been serious adverse events associated with the virus .
Theres one last elephant in the room , the proteins themselves , which come from algae and bacteria and fungi , and all over the tree of life .
Most of us dont have fungi or algae in our brains , so what is our brain going to do if we put that in ?
Are the cells going to tolerate it ? Will the immune system react ?
In its early days  -  -  these have not been done on humans yet  -  -  but were working on a variety of studies to try and examine this , and so far we havent seen overt reactions of any severity to these molecules or to the illumination of the brain with light .
So its early days , to be upfront , but were excited about it .
I wanted to close with one story , which we think could potentially be a clinical application .
Now there are many forms of blindness where the photoreceptors , our light sensors that are in the back of our eye , are gone .
And the retina , of course , is a complex structure .
Now lets zoom in on it here , so we can see it in more detail .
The photoreceptor cells are shown here at the top , and then the signals that are detected by the photoreceptors are transformed by various computations until finally that layer of cells at the bottom , the ganglion cells , relay the information to the brain , where we see that as perception .
In many forms of blindness , like retinitis pigmentosa , or macular degeneration , the photoreceptor cells have atrophied or been destroyed .
Now how could you repair this ?
Its not even clear that a drug could cause this to be restored , because theres nothing for the drug to bind to .
On the other hand , light can still get into the eye .
The eye is still transparent and you can get light in .
So what if we could just take these channelrhodopsins and other molecules and install them on some of these other spare cells and convert them into little cameras .
And because theres so many of these cells in the eye , potentially , they could be very high - resolution cameras .
So this is some work that were doing .
Its being led by one of our collaborators , Alan Horsager at USC , and being sought to be commercialized by a start - up company Eos Neuroscience , which is funded by the NIH .
And what you see here is a mouse trying to solve a maze .
Its a six - arm maze . And theres a bit of water in the maze to motivate the mouse to move , or hell just sit there .
And the goal , of course , of this maze is to get out of the water and go to a little platform thats under the lit top port .
Now mice are smart , so this mouse solves the maze eventually , but he does a brute - force search .
Hes swimming down every avenue until he finally gets to the platform .
So hes not using vision to do it .
These different mice are different mutations that recapitulate different kinds of blindness that affect humans .
And so were being careful in trying to look at these different models so we come up with a generalized approach .
So how are we going to solve this ?
Were going to do exactly what we outlined in the previous slide .
Were going to take these blue light photosensors and install them on a layer of cells in the middle of the retina in the back of the eye and convert them into a camera  -  -  just like installing solar cells all over those neurons to make them light sensitive .
Light is converted to electricity on them .
So this mouse was blind a couple weeks before this experiment and received one dose of this photosensitive molecule in a virus .
And now you can see , the animal can indeed avoid walls and go to this little platform and make cognitive use of its eyes again .
And to point out the power of this : these animals are able to get to that platform So this pre - clinical study , I think , bodes hope for the kinds of things were hoping to do in the future .
To close , I want to point out that were also exploring new business models for this new field of neurotechnology .
Were developing these tools , but we share them freely with hundreds of groups all over the world , so people can study and try to treat different disorders .
And our hope is that , by figuring out brain circuits at a level of abstraction that lets us repair them and engineer them , we can take some of these intractable disorders that I told you about earlier , practically none of which are cured , and in the 21st century make them history .
Thank you .
Juan Enriquez : So some of the stuff is a little dense .
But the implications of being able to control seizures or epilepsy with light instead of drugs , and being able to target those specifically is a first step .
The second thing that I think I heard you say is you can now control the brain in two colors , like an on / off switch .
Ed Boyden : Thats right .
JE : Which makes every impulse going through the brain a binary code .
Right , yeah .
So with blue light , we can drive information , and its in the form of a one .
And by turning things off , its more or less a zero .
So our hope is to eventually build brain coprocessors that work with the brain so we can augment functions in people with disabilities .
JE : And in theory , that means that , as a mouse feels , smells , hears , touches , you can model it out as a string of ones and zeros .
Sure , yeah . Were hoping to use this as a way of testing what neural codes can drive certain behaviors and certain thoughts and certain feelings , and use that to understand more about the brain .
JE : Does that mean that some day you could download memories and maybe upload them ?
Well thats something were starting to work on very hard .
Were now working on some work where were trying to tile the brain with recording elements too .
So we can record information and then drive information back in  -  -  sort of computing what the brain needs in order to augment its information processing .
JE : Well , that might change a couple things . Thank you .
Ueli Gegenschatz : Extreme wingsuit flying
Wingsuit jumping is the leading edge of extreme sports  -  -  an exhilarating feat of almost unbelievable daring , where skydivers soar through canyons at over 100MPH . Ueli Gegenschatz talks about how he does it , and shows jawdropping film .
I started with paragliding .
Paragliding is taking off from mountains with a paraglider , with the possibility to fly cross - country , distance , just with the use of thermals to soar .
Also different aerobatic maneuvers are possible with a paraglider .
From there I started with skydiving .
In this picture you can see there is a four - way skydive , four people flying together , and on the left hand side its the camera flier with the camera mounted to his helmet so he can film the whole jump , for the film itself and also for the judging .
From regular , relative skydiving I went on to freeflying .
Freeflying is more the three - dimensional skydiving .
You can see the skydiver with the red suit , hes in a stand - up position .
The one with the yellow - green suit , hes flying head - down .
And thats me in the background , carving around the whole formation in freefall also , with the helmet cam to film this jump .
From freeflying I went on to skysurfing .
Skysurfing is skydiving with a board on the feet .
You can imagine with this big surface of a skysurfing board , there is a lot of force , a lot of power .
Of course I can use this power for example for nice spinning  -  -  we call it  helicopter moves . 
From there I went on to wingsuit flying .
Wingsuit flying is a suit , that I can make fly , just only with my body .
If I put some tension on my body , tension on my suit , I can make it fly . And as you see the fall rate is much much slower because of the bigger surface .
With a proper body position Im able to really move forward to gain quite some distance .
This is a jump I did in Rio de Janeiro .
You can see the Copacabana on the left - hand side .
From there with all the skills and knowledge from paragliding and all the different disciplines in skydiving , I went on to BASE jumping .
BASE jumping is skydiving from fixed objects , like buildings , antennae , bridges and earth  -  -  meaning mountains , cliffs .
of being in free fall , with all the visual references .
So my goal soon was to discover new places that nobody had jumped before .
So in summer 2000 I was the first to BASE jump the Eiger North Face in Switzerland .
Two years after this , I was the first to BASE jump from Matterhorn , a very famous mountain that probably everybody knows in here .
2005 I did a BASE jump from the Eiger , from the Monk and from the Jungfrau , three very famous mountains in Switzerland .
The special thing on these three jumps were , I hiked them all and climbed them all in only one day .
In 2008 I jumped the Eiffel Tower in Paris .
So with all this knowledge , I also wanted to get into stunts .
So with some friends we started to do different tricks , like for example this jump here , I jumped from a paraglider .
Or here  -  -  everybody was freezing , pretty much , except me , because it was very cold in Austria where we did this filming .
Everybody sitting in a basket , and I was on top of the balloon , ready to slide down with my skysurf board .
Or this jump , from a moving truck on the highway .
Extreme sports on top level like this is only possible if you practice step by step , if you really work hard on your skills and on your knowledge .
Of course you need to be in physical , very good , condition , so Im training a lot .
You need to have the best possible equipment .
And probably the most important is you have to work on your mental skills , mental preparation .
And all this to come as close as possible to the human dream of being able to fly .
So for 2009 , Im training hard for my two new projects .
The first one , I want to set a world record in flying from a cliff with my wingsuit .
And I want to set a new record , with the longest distance ever flown .
For my second project , I have a sensational idea of a jump that never has been done before .
So now , on the following movie you will see that Im much better in flying a wingsuit than speaking in English .
Enjoy , and thank you very much .
I have some questions .
I think we all might have some questions .
Question one : so does that actually feel the way the flying dream does ?
Because it looks like it might .
Ueli Gegenschatz : Pretty much . I believe this is probably the closest possibility to come to the dream of being able to fly .
I know the answer to this , but how do you land ?
UE : Parachute . We have to open a parachute just seconds before , I would say , impact .
Its not possible to land a wingsuit yet .
Yet . But people are trying . Are you among those  -  -  youre not going to commit  -  -  are you among those trying to do it ?
UE : Its a dream . Its a dream . Yeah .
Were still working on it and were developing the wingsuits to get better performance , to get more knowledge .
And I believe soon .
All right . Well we will watch this space . But I have two more questions .
What is the  -  -  there was exhaust coming out of the back of the wingsuit . Was that a propelled wingsuit that you were wearing ?
UE : Nope . Its just smoke .
Coming off of you ?
UE : Hopefully not .
That seems dangerous .
UE : No , smoke is for two reasons , you can see the speed , you can see the way where I was flying .
Thats reason number one . And reason number two : its much easier for the camera guy to film If Im using smoke .
Ah , I see . So the wingsuit is set up to deliberately release smoke so that you can be tracked . One more question .
What do you do to to cover your face ?
Because I just keep thinking of going that fast and having your whole face smushed backwards .
Are you in a helmet ? Are you in goggles ?
UE : The purest and the best feeling would be with only goggles .
And is that how you usually fly ?
UE : Usually Im wearing a helmet . In the mountains Im always wearing a helmet because of landings  -  -  usually its difficult  -  -  its not like regular skydiving where you have like the big landings .
So you have to be prepared .
Right . Now is there anything you dont do ?
Do people come to you with projects and say ,  We want you to do this ! 
and do you ever say ,  No , no Im not going to . 
UE : Oh of course , of course . Some people have crazy ideas and  -  -  ... a round of applause ...
UE : Thank you very much .
Amanda Palmer : The art of asking
Dont make people pay for music , says Amanda Palmer : Let them . In a passionate talk that begins in her days as a street performer , she examines the new relationship between artist and fan .
So I didnt always make my living from music .
For about the five years after graduating from an upstanding liberal arts university , this was my day job .
I was a self - employed living statue called the 8 - Foot Bride , and I love telling people l did this for a job , because everybody always wants to know , who are these freaks in real life ?
Hello .
I painted myself white one day , stood on a box , put a hat or a can at my feet , and when someone came by and dropped in money , I handed them a flower and some intense eye contact .
And if they didnt take the flower , I threw in a gesture of sadness and longing as they walked away .
So I had the most profound encounters with people , especially lonely people who looked like they hadnt talked to anyone in weeks , and we would get this beautiful moment of prolonged eye contact being allowed in a city street , and we would sort of fall in love a little bit .
And my eyes would say ,  Thank you . I see you . 
And their eyes would say ,  Nobody ever sees me . Thank you . 
And I would get harassed sometimes .
People would yell at me from their passing cars .
 Get a job ! 
And Id be , like ,  This is my job . 
But it hurt , because it made me fear that I was somehow doing something un - joblike and unfair , shameful .
I had no idea how perfect a real education I was getting for the music business on this box .
And for the economists out there , you may be interested to know I actually made a pretty predictable income , which was shocking to me given I had no regular customers , but pretty much 60 bucks on a Tuesday , 90 bucks on a Friday .
It was consistent .
And meanwhile , I was touring locally and playing in nightclubs with my band , the Dresden Dolls .
This was me on piano , a genius drummer .
I wrote the songs , and eventually we started making enough money that I could quit being a statue , and as we started touring , I really didnt want to lose this sense of direct connection with people , because I loved it .
So after all of our shows , we would sign autographs and hug fans and hang out and talk to people , and we made an art out of asking people to help us and join us , and I would track down local musicians and artists and they would set up outside of our shows , and they would pass the hat , and then they would come in and join us onstage , so we had this rotating smorgasbord of weird , random circus guests .
And then Twitter came along , and made things even more magic , because I could ask instantly for anything anywhere .
So I would need a piano to practice on , and an hour later I would be at a fans house . This is in London .
People would bring home - cooked food to us all over the world backstage and feed us and eat with us . This is in Seattle .
Fans who worked in museums and stores and any kind of public space would wave their hands if I would decide to do a last - minute , spontaneous , free gig .
This is a library in Auckland .
On Saturday I tweeted for this crate and hat , because I did not want to schlep them from the East Coast , and they showed up care of this dude , Chris from Newport Beach , who says hello .
I once tweeted , where in Melbourne can I buy a neti pot ?
And a nurse from a hospital drove one right at that moment to the cafe I was in , and I bought her a smoothie and we sat there talking about nursing and death .
And I love this kind of random closeness , which is lucky , because I do a lot of couchsurfing .
In mansions where everyone in my crew gets their own room but theres no wireless , and in punk squats , everyone on the floor in one room with no toilets but with wireless , clearly making it the better option .
My crew once pulled our van up to a really poor Miami neighborhood and we found out that our couchsurfing host for the night was an 18 - year - old girl , still living at home , and her family were all undocumented immigrants from Honduras .
And that night , her whole family took the couches and she slept together with her mom so that we could take their beds .
And I lay there thinking , these people have so little .
Is this fair ?
And in the morning , her mom taught us how to try to make tortillas and wanted to give me a Bible , and she took me aside and she said to me in her broken English ,  Your music has helped my daughter so much .
Thank you for staying here . Were all so grateful . 
And I thought , this is fair .
This is this .
A couple months later , I was in Manhattan , and I tweeted for a crash pad , and at midnight , Im ringing a doorbell on the Lower East Side , and it occurs to me Ive never actually done this alone .
Ive always been with my band or my crew .
Is this what stupid people do ?
Is this how stupid people die ?
And before I can change my mind , the door busts open .
Shes an artist . Hes a financial blogger for Reuters , and theyre pouring me a glass of red wine and offering me a bath , and I have had thousands of nights like that and like that .
So I couchsurf a lot . I also crowdsurf a lot .
I maintain couchsurfing and crowdsurfing are basically the same thing .
Youre falling into the audience and youre trusting each other .
I once asked an opening band of mine if they wanted to go out into the crowd and pass the hat to get themselves some extra money , something that I did a lot .
And as usual , the band was psyched , but there was this one guy in the band who told me he just couldnt bring himself to go out there .
It felt too much like begging to stand there with the hat .
And I recognized his fear of  Is this fair ?  and  Get a job . 
And meanwhile , my band is becoming bigger and bigger .
We signed with a major label .
And our music is a cross between punk and cabaret .
Its not for everybody .
Well , maybe its for you .
We sign , and theres all this hype leading up to our next record .
And it comes out and it sells about 25,000 copies in the first few weeks , and the label considers this a failure .
And I was like ,  25,000 , isnt that a lot ? 
They were like ,  No , the sales are going down . Its a failure . 
And they walk off .
Right at this same time , Im signing and hugging after a gig , and a guy comes up to me and hands me a $ 10 bill , and he says ,  Im sorry , I burned your CD from a friend . 
 But I read your blog , I know you hate your label .
I just want you to have this money . 
And this starts happening all the time .
I become the hat after my own gigs , but I have to physically stand there and take the help from people , and unlike the guy in the opening band , Ive actually had a lot of practice standing there .
Thank you .
And this is the moment I decide Im just going to give away my music for free online whenever possible , so its like Metallica over here , Napster , bad ; Amanda Palmer over here , and Im going to encourage torrenting , downloading , sharing , but Im going to ask for help , because I saw it work on the street .
So I fought my way off my label and for my next project with my new band , the Grand Theft Orchestra , I turned to crowdfunding , and I fell into those thousands of connections that Id made , and I asked my crowd to catch me .
And the goal was 100,000 dollars .
My fans backed me at nearly 1.2 million , which was the biggest music crowdfunding project to date .
And you can see how many people it is .
Its about 25,000 people .
And the media asked ,  Amanda , the music business is tanking and you encourage piracy .
How did you make all these people pay for music ? 
And the real answer is , I didnt make them . I asked them .
And through the very act of asking people , Id connected with them , and when you connect with them , people want to help you .
Its kind of counterintuitive for a lot of artists .
They dont want to ask for things .
But its not easy . Its not easy to ask .
And a lot of artists have a problem with this .
Asking makes you vulnerable .
And I got a lot of criticism online after my Kickstarter went big for continuing my crazy crowdsourcing practices , specifically for asking musicians who are fans if they wanted to join us on stage for a few songs in exchange for love and tickets and beer , and this was a doctored image that went up of me on a website .
And this hurt in a really familiar way .
And people saying ,  Youre not allowed anymore to ask for that kind of help ,  really reminded me of the people in their cars yelling ,  Get a job . 
Because they werent with us on the sidewalk , and they couldnt see the exchange that was happening between me and my crowd , an exchange that was very fair to us but alien to them .
So this is slightly not safe for work .
This is my Kickstarter backer party in Berlin .
At the end of the night , I stripped and let everyone draw on me .
Now let me tell you , if you want to experience the visceral feeling of trusting strangers , I recommend this , especially if those strangers are drunk German people .
This was a ninja master - level fan connection , because what I was really saying here was , I trust you this much .
Should I ? Show me .
For most of human history , musicians , artists , theyve been part of the community , connectors and openers , not untouchable stars .
Celebrity is about a lot of people loving you from a distance , but the Internet and the content that were freely able to share on it are taking us back .
Its about a few people loving you up close and about those people being enough .
So a lot of people are confused by the idea of no hard sticker price .
They see it as an unpredictable risk , but the things Ive done , the Kickstarter , the street , the doorbell , I dont see these things as risk .
I see them as trust .
Now , the online tools to make the exchange as easy and as instinctive as the street , theyre getting there .
But the perfect tools arent going to help us if we cant face each other and give and receive fearlessly , but , more important , to ask without shame .
My music career has been spent trying to encounter people on the Internet the way I could on the box , so blogging and tweeting not just about my tour dates and my new video but about our work and our art and our fears and our hangovers , our mistakes , and we see each other .
And I think when we really see each other , we want to help each other .
I think people have been obsessed with the wrong question , which is ,  How do we make people pay for music ? 
What if we started asking ,  How do we let people pay for music ? 
Thank you .
Mikko Hypponen : How the NSA betrayed the worlds trust  -  -  time to act
Recent events have highlighted , underlined and bolded the fact that the United States is performing blanket surveillance on any foreigner whose data passes through an American entity  -  -  whether they are suspected of wrongdoing or not . This means that , essentially , every international user of the internet is being watched , says Mikko Hypponen . An important rant , wrapped with a plea : to find alternative solutions to using American companies for the worlds information needs .
The two most likely largest inventions of our generation are the Internet and the mobile phone .
Theyve changed the world .
However , largely to our surprise , they also turned out to be the perfect tools for the surveillance state .
It turned out that the capability to collect data , information and connections about basically any of us and all of us is exactly what weve been hearing throughout of the summer through revelations and leaks about Western intelligence agencies , mostly U.S . intelligence agencies , watching over the rest of the world .
Weve heard about these starting with the revelations from June 6 .
Edward Snowden started leaking information , top secret classified information , from the U.S . intelligence agencies , and we started learning about things like PRISM and XKeyscore and others .
And these are examples of the kinds of programs U.S . intelligence agencies are running right now , against the whole rest of the world .
And if you look back about the forecasts on surveillance by George Orwell , well it turns out that George Orwell was an optimist .
We are right now seeing a much larger scale of tracking of individual citizens than he could have ever imagined .
And this here is the infamous NSA data center in Utah .
Due to be opened very soon , it will be both a supercomputing center and a data storage center .
You could basically imagine it has a large hall filled with hard drives storing data they are collecting .
And its a pretty big building .
How big ? Well , I can give you the numbers  -  -  140,000 square meters  -  -  but that doesnt really tell you very much .
Maybe its better to imagine it as a comparison .
You think about the largest IKEA store youve ever been in .
This is five times larger .
How many hard drives can you fit in an IKEA store ?
Right ? Its pretty big .
We estimate that just the electricity bill for running this data center is going to be in the tens of millions of dollars a year .
And this kind of wholesale surveillance means that they can collect our data and keep it basically forever , keep it for extended periods of time , keep it for years , keep it for decades .
And this opens up completely new kinds of risks to us all .
And what this is is that it is wholesale blanket surveillance on everyone .
Well , not exactly everyone , because the U.S . intelligence only has a legal right to monitor foreigners .
They can monitor foreigners when foreigners data connections end up in the United States or pass through the United States .
And monitoring foreigners doesnt sound too bad until you realize that Im a foreigner and youre a foreigner .
In fact , 96 percent of the planet are foreigners .
Right ?
So it is wholesale blanket surveillance of all of us , all of us who use telecommunications and the Internet .
But dont get me wrong : There are actually types of surveillance that are okay .
I love freedom , but even I agree that some surveillance is fine .
If the law enforcement is trying to find a murderer , or theyre trying to catch a drug lord or trying to prevent a school shooting , and they have leads and they have suspects , then its perfectly fine for them to tap the suspects phone , and to intercept his Internet communications .
Im not arguing that at all , but thats not what programs like PRISM are about .
They are not about doing surveillance on people that they have reason to suspect of some wrongdoings .
Theyre about doing surveillance on people they know are innocent .
So the four main arguments supporting surveillance like this , well , the first of all is that whenever you start discussing about these revelations , there will be naysayers trying to minimize the importance of these revelations , saying that we knew all this already , we knew it was happening , theres nothing new here .
And thats not true . Dont let anybody tell you that we knew this already , because we did not know this already .
Our worst fears might have been something like this , but we didnt know this was happening .
Now we know for a fact its happening .
We didnt know about this . We didnt know about PRISM .
We didnt know about XKeyscore . We didnt know about Cybertrans .
We didnt know about DoubleArrow .
We did not know about Skywriter  -  -  all these different programs run by U.S . intelligence agencies .
But now we do .
And we did not know that U.S . intelligence agencies go to extremes such as infiltrating standardization bodies to sabotage encryption algorithms on purpose .
And what that means is that you take something which is secure , an encryption algorithm which is so secure that if you use that algorithm to encrypt one file , nobody can decrypt that file .
Even if they take every single computer on the planet just to decrypt that one file , its going to take millions of years .
So thats basically perfectly safe , uncrackable .
You take something which is that good and then you weaken it on purpose , making all of us less secure as an end result .
A real - world equivalent would be that intelligence agencies would force some secret pin code into every single house alarm so they could get into every single house because , you know , bad people might have house alarms , but it will also make all of us less secure as an end result .
Backdooring encryption algorithms just boggles the mind .
But of course , these intelligence agencies are doing their job .
This is what they have been told to do : do signals intelligence , monitor telecommunications , monitor Internet traffic .
Thats what theyre trying to do , and since most , a very big part of the Internet traffic today is encrypted , theyre trying to find ways around the encryption .
One way is to sabotage encryption algorithms , which is a great example about how U.S . intelligence agencies are running loose .
They are completely out of control , and they should be brought back under control .
So what do we actually know about the leaks ?
Everything is based on the files leaked by Mr. Snowden .
The very first PRISM slides from the beginning of June detail a collection program where the data is collected from service providers , and they actually go and name the service providers they have access to .
They even have a specific date on when the collection of data began for each of the service providers .
So for example , they name the collection from Microsoft started on September 11 , 2007 , for Yahoo on the March 12 , 2008 , and then others : Google , Facebook , Skype , Apple and so on .
And every single one of these companies denies .
They all say that this simply isnt true , that they are not giving backdoor access to their data .
Yet we have these files .
So is one of the parties lying , or is there some other alternative explanation ?
And one explanation would be that these parties , these service providers , are not cooperating .
Instead , theyve been hacked .
That would explain it . They arent cooperating . Theyve been hacked .
In this case , theyve been hacked by their own government .
That might sound outlandish , but we already have cases where this has happened , for example , the case of the Flame malware which we strongly believe was authored by the U.S . government , and which , to spread , subverted the security of the Windows Update network , meaning here , the company was hacked by their own government .
And theres more evidence supporting this theory as well .
Der Spiegel , from Germany , leaked more information about the operations run by the elite hacker units operating inside these intelligence agencies .
Inside NSA , the unit is called TAO , Tailored Access Operations , and inside GCHQ , which is the U.K . equivalent , its called NAC , Network Analysis Centre .
And these recent leaks of these three slides detail an operation run by this GCHQ intelligence agency from the United Kingdom targeting a telecom here in Belgium .
And what this really means is that an E.U . countrys intelligence agency is breaching the security of a telecom of a fellow E.U . country on purpose , and they discuss it in their slides completely casually , business as usual .
Heres the primary target , heres the secondary target , heres the teaming .
They probably have a team building on Thursday evening in a pub .
They even use cheesy PowerPoint clip art like , you know ,  Success ,  when they gain access to services like this .
What the hell ?
And then theres the argument that okay , yes , this might be going on , but then again , other countries are doing it as well .
All countries spy .
And maybe thats true .
Many countries spy , not all of them , but lets take an example .
Lets take , for example , Sweden .
Im speaking of Sweden because Sweden has a little bit of a similar law to the United States .
When your data traffic goes through Sweden , their intelligence agency has a legal right by the law to intercept that traffic .
All right , how many Swedish decisionmakers and politicians and business leaders use , every day , U.S . - based services , like , you know , run Windows or OSX , or use Facebook or LinkedIn , or store their data in clouds like iCloud or Skydrive or DropBox , or maybe use online services like Amazon web services or sales support ?
And the answer is , every single Swedish business leader does that every single day .
And then we turn it around .
How many American leaders use Swedish webmails and cloud services ?
And the answer is zero .
So this is not balanced .
Its not balanced by any means , not even close .
And when we do have the occasional European success story , even those , then , typically end up being sold to the United States .
Like , Skype used to be secure .
It used to be end - to - end encrypted .
Then it was sold to the United States .
Today , it no longer is secure .
So once again , we take something which is secure and then we make it less secure on purpose , making all of us less secure as an outcome .
And then the argument that the United States is only fighting terrorists .
Its the war on terror .
You shouldnt worry about it .
Well , its not the war on terror .
Yes , part of it is war on terror , and yes , there are terrorists , and they do kill and maim , and we should fight them , but we know through these leaks that they have used the same techniques to listen to phone calls of European leaders , to tap the email of residents of Mexico and Brazil , to read email traffic inside the United Nations Headquarters and E.U . Parliament , and I dont think they are trying to find terrorists from inside the E.U . Parliament , right ?
Its not the war on terror .
Part of it might be , and there are terrorists , but are we really thinking about terrorists as such an existential threat that we are willing to do anything at all to fight them ?
Are the Americans ready to throw away the Constituion and throw it in the trash just because there are terrorists ?
And the same thing with the Bill of Rights and all the amendments and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the E.U . conventions on human rights and fundamental freedoms and the press freedom ?
Do we really think terrorism is such an existential threat , we are ready to do anything at all ?
But people are scared about terrorists , and then they think that maybe that surveillance is okay because they have nothing to hide .
Feel free to survey me if that helps .
And whoever tells you that they have nothing to hide simply hasnt thought about this long enough .
Because we have this thing called privacy , and if you really think that you have nothing to hide , please make sure thats the first thing you tell me , because then I know that I should not trust you with any secrets , because obviously you cant keep a secret .
But people are brutally honest with the Internet , and when these leaks started , many people were asking me about this .
And I have nothing to hide .
Im not doing anything bad or anything illegal .
Yet , I have nothing that I would in particular like to share with an intelligence agency , especially a foreign intelligence agency .
And if we indeed need a Big Brother , I would much rather have a domestic Big Brother than a foreign Big Brother .
And when the leaks started , the very first thing I tweeted about this was a comment about how , when youve been using search engines , youve been potentially leaking all that to U.S . intelligence .
And two minutes later , I got a reply by somebody called Kimberly from the United States challenging me , like , why am I worried about this ?
What am I sending to worry about this ? Am I sending naked pictures or something ?
And my answer to Kimberly was that what Im sending is none of your business , and it should be none of your governments business either .
Because thats what its about . Its about privacy .
Privacy is nonnegotiable .
It should be built in to all the systems we use .
And one thing we should all understand is that we are brutally honest with search engines .
You show me your search history , and Ill find something incriminating or something embarrassing there in five minutes .
We are more honest with search engines than we are with our families .
Search engines know more about you than your family members know about you .
And this is all the kind of information we are giving away , we are giving away to the United States .
And surveillance changes history .
We know this through examples of corrupt presidents like Nixon .
Imagine if he would have had the kind of surveillance tools that are available today .
And let me actually quote the president of Brazil , Ms. Dilma Rousseff .
She was one of the targets of NSA surveillance .
Her email was read , and she spoke at the United Nations Headquarters , and she said ,  If there is no right to privacy , there can be no true freedom of expression and opinion , and therefore , there can be no effective democracy . 
Thats what its about .
Privacy is the building block of our democracies .
And to quote a fellow security researcher , Marcus Ranum , he said that the United States is right now treating the Internet as it would be treating one of its colonies .
So we are back to the age of colonization , and we , the foreign users of the Internet , we should think about Americans as our masters .
So Mr. Snowden , hes been blamed for many things .
Some are blaming him for causing problems for the U.S . cloud industry and software companies with these revelations  -  -  and blaming Snowden for causing problems for the U.S . cloud industry would be the equivalent of blaming Al Gore for causing global warming .
So , what is there to be done ?
Should we worry . No , we shouldnt worry .
We should be angry , because this is wrong , and its rude , and it should not be done .
But thats not going to really change the situation .
Whats going to change the situation for the rest of the world is to try to steer away from systems built in the United States .
And thats much easier said than done .
How do you do that ?
A single country , any single country in Europe can not replace and build replacements for the U.S . - made operating systems and cloud services .
But maybe you dont have to do it alone .
Maybe you can do it together with other countries .
The solution is open source .
By building together open , free , secure systems , we can go around such surveillance , and then one country doesnt have to solve the problem by itself .
It only has to solve one little problem .
And to quote a fellow security researcher , Haroon Meer , one country only has to make a small wave , but those small waves together become a tide , and the tide will lift all the boats up at the same time , and the tide we will build with secure , free , open - source systems , will become the tide that will lift all of us up and above the surveillance state .
Thank you very much .
Charlie Todd : The shared experience of absurdity
Charlie Todd causes bizarre , hilarious , and unexpected public scenes : Seventy synchronized dancers in storefront windows ,  ghostbusters  running through the New York Public Library , and the annual no - pants subway ride . In his talk , he shows how his group , Improv Everywhere , uses these scenes to bring people together . 
I started Improv Everywhere about 10 years ago when I moved to New York City with an interest in acting and comedy .
Because I was new to the city , I didnt have access to a stage , so I decided to create my own in public places .
So the first project were going to take a look at is the very first No Pants Subway Ride .
Now this took place in January of 2002 .
And this woman is the star of the video .
She doesnt know shes being filmed .
Shes being filmed with a hidden camera .
This is on the 6 train in New York City .
And this is the first stop along the line .
These are two Danish guys who come out and sit down next to the hidden camera .
And thats me right there in a brown coat .
Its about 30 degrees outside .
Im wearing a hat . Im wearing a scarf .
And the girls going to notice me right here .
And as youll see now , Im not wearing pants .
So at this point  -  -  at this point shes noticed me , but in New York theres weirdos on any given train car .
One persons not that unusual .
She goes back to reading her book , which is unfortunately titled  Rape . 
So shes noticed the unusual thing , but shes gone back to her normal life .
Now in the meantime , I have six friends who are waiting at the next six consecutive stops in their underwear as well .
Theyre going to be entering this car one by one .
Well act as though we dont know each other .
And well act as if its just an unfortunate mistake weve made , forgetting our pants on this cold January day .
So at this point , she decides to put the rape book away .
And she decides to be a little bit more aware of her surroundings .
Now in the meantime , the two Danish guys to the left of the camera , theyre cracking up .
They think this is the funniest thing theyve ever seen before .
And watch her make eye contact with them right about now .
And I love that moment in this video , because before it became a shared experience , it was something that was maybe a little bit scary , or something that was at least confusing to her .
And then once it became a shared experience , it was funny and something that she could laugh at .
So the train is now pulling into the third stop along the 6 line .
So the video wont show everything .
This goes on for another four stops .
A total of seven guys enter anonymously in their underwear .
At the eighth stop , a girl came in with a giant duffel bag and announced she had pants for sale for a dollar  -  -  like you might sell batteries or candy on the train .
We all very matter of factly bought a pair of pants , put them on and said ,  Thank you . Thats exactly what I needed today ,  and then exited without revealing what had happened and went in all different directions .
Thank you .
So thats a still from the video there .
And I love that girls reaction so much .
And watching that videotape later that day inspired me to keep doing what I do .
And really one of the points of Improv Everywhere is to cause a scene in a public place that is a positive experience for other people .
Its a prank , but its a prank that gives somebody a great story to tell .
And her reaction inspired me to do a second annual No Pants Subway Ride .
And weve continued to do it every year .
This January , we did the 10th annual No Pants Subway Ride where a diverse group of 3,500 people rode the train in their underwear in New York  -  -  almost every single train line in the city .
And also in 50 other cities around the world , people participated .
As I started taking improv class at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater and meeting other creative people and other performers and comedians , I started amassing a mailing list of people who wanted to do these types of projects .
So I could do more large - scale projects .
Well one day I was walking through Union Square , and I saw this building , which had just been built in 2005 .
And there was a girl in one of the windows and she was dancing .
And it was very peculiar , because it was dark out , but she was back - lit with florescent lighting , and she was very much onstage , and I couldnt figure out why she was doing it .
After about 15 seconds , her friend appeared  -  -  she had been hiding behind a display  -  -  and they laughed and hugged each other and ran away .
So it seemed like maybe she had been dared to do this .
So I got inspired by that .
Looking at the entire facade  -  -  there were 70 total windows  -  -  and I knew what I had to do .
So this project is called Look Up More . We had 70 actors dress in black .
This was completely unauthorized .
We didnt let the stores know we were coming .
And I stood in the park giving signals .
The first signal was for everybody to hold up these four - foot tall letters that spelled out  Look Up More ,  the name of the project .
The second signal was for everybody to do Jumping jacks together .
Youll see that start right here .
And then we had dancing . We had everyone dance .
And then we had dance solos where only one person would dance and everybody would point to them .
So then I gave a new hand signal , which signaled the next soloist down below in Forever 21 , and he danced .
There were several other activities .
We had people jumping up and down , people dropping to the ground .
And I was standing just anonymously in a sweatshirt , putting my hand on and off of a trashcan to signal the advancement .
And because it was in Union Square Park , right by a subway station , there were hundreds of people by the end who stopped and looked up and watched what we were doing .
Theres a better photo of it .
So that particular event was inspired by a moment that I happened to stumble upon .
The next project I want to show was given to me in an email from a stranger .
A high school kid in Texas wrote me in 2006 and said ,  You should get as many people as possible to put on blue polo shirts and khaki pants and go into a Best Buy and stand around . 
So I wrote this high school kid back immediately , and I said ,  Yes , you are correct .
I think Ill try to do that this weekend . Thank you . 
So heres the video .
So again , this is 2005 .
This is the Best Buy in New York City .
We had about 80 people show up to participate , entering one - by - one .
There was an eight year - old girl , a 10 year - old girl .
There was also a 65 year - old man who participated .
So a very diverse group of people .
And I told people ,  Dont work . Dont actually do work .
But also , dont shop .
Just stand around and dont face products . 
Now you can see the regular employees by the ones that have the yellow tags on their shirt .
Everybody else is one of our actors .
The lower level employees thought it was very funny .
And in fact , several of them went to go get their camera from the break room and took photos with us .
A lot of them made jokes about trying to get us to go to the back to get heavy television sets for customers .
The managers and the security guards , on the other hand , did not find it particularly funny .
You can see them in this footage .
Theyre wearing either a yellow shirt or a black shirt .
And we were there probably 10 minutes before the managers decided to dial 911 .
So they started running around telling everybody the cops were coming , watch out , the cops were coming .
And you can see the cops in this footage right here .
Thats a cop wearing black right there , being filmed with a hidden camera .
Ultimately , the police had to inform Best Buy management that it was not , in fact , illegal to wear a blue polo shirt and khaki pants .
Thank you .
So we had been there for 20 minutes ; we were happy to exit the store .
One thing the managers were trying to do was to track down our cameras .
And they caught a couple of my guys who had hidden cameras in duffel bags .
But the one camera guy they never caught was the guy that went in just with a blank tape and went over to the Best Buy camera department and just put his tape in one of their cameras and pretended to shop .
So I like that concept of using their own technology against them .
I think our best projects are ones that are site specific and happen at a particular place for a reason .
And one morning , I was riding the subway .
I had to make a transfer at the 53rd St . stop where there are these two giant escalators .
And its a very depressing place to be in the morning , its very crowded .
So I decided to try and stage something that could make it as happy as possible for one morning .
So this was in the winter of 2009  -  -  8 : 30 in the morning .
Its morning rush hour .
Its very cold outside .
People are coming in from Queens , transferring from the E train to the 6 train .
And theyre going up these giant escalators on their way to their jobs .
Thank you .
So theres a photograph that illustrates it a little bit better .
He gave 2,000 high fives that day , and he washed his hands before and afterward and did not get sick .
And that was done also without permission , although no one seemed to care .
So Id say over the years , one of the most common criticisms I see of Improv Everywhere left anonymously on YouTube comments is :  These people have too much time on their hands . 
And you know , not everybodys going to like everything you do , and Ive certainly developed a thick skin thanks to Internet comments , but that ones always bothered me , because we dont have too much time on our hands .
The participants at Improv Everywhere events have just as much leisure time as any other New Yorkers , they just occasionally choose to spend it in an unusual way .
You know , every Saturday and Sunday , hundreds of thousands of people each fall gather in football stadiums to watch games .
And Ive never seen anybody comment , looking at a football game , saying ,  All those people in the stands , they have too much time on their hands . 
And of course they dont .
Its a perfectly wonderful way to spent a weekend afternoon , watching a football game in a stadium .
But I think its also a perfectly valid way to spend an afternoon freezing in place with 200 people in the Grand Central terminal or dressing up like a ghostbuster and running through the New York Public Library .
Or listening to the same MP3 as 3,000 other people and dancing silently in a park , or bursting into song in a grocery store as part of a spontaneous musical , or diving into the ocean in Coney Island wearing formal attire .
You know , as kids , were taught to play .
And were never given a reason why we should play .
Its just acceptable that play is a good thing .
And I think thats sort of the point of Improv Everywhere .
Its that there is no point and that there doesnt have to be a point .
We dont need a reason .
As long as its fun and it seems like its going to be a funny idea and it seems like the people who witness it will also have a fun time , then thats enough for us .
And I think , as adults , we need to learn that theres no right or wrong way to play .
Thank you very much .
Edi Rama : Take back your city with paint
Make a city beautiful , curb corruption . Edi Rama took this deceptively simple path as mayor of Tirana , Albania , where he instilled pride in his citizens by transforming public spaces with colorful designs . With projects that put the people first , Rama decreased crime  -  -  and showed his citizens they could have faith in their leaders . 
In my previous life , I was an artist .
I still paint . I love art .
I love the joy that color can give to our lives and to our communities , and I try to bring something of the artist in me in my politics , and I see part of my job today , the reason for being here , not just to campaign for my party , but for politics , and the role it can play for the better in our lives .
For 11 years , I was mayor of Tirana , our capital .
We faced many challenges .
Art was part of the answer , and my name , in the very beginning , was linked with two things : demolition of illegal constructions in order to get public space back , and use of colors in order to revive the hope that had been lost in my city .
But this use of colors was not just an artistic act .
Rather , it was a form of political action in a context when the city budget I had available after being elected amounted to zero comma something .
When we painted the first building , by splashing a radiant orange on the somber gray of a facade , something unimaginable happened .
There was a traffic jam and a crowd of people gathered as if it were the location of some spectacular accident , or the sudden sighting of a visiting pop star .
The French E.U . official in charge of the funding rushed to block the painting .
He screeched that he would block the financing .
 But why ?  I asked him .
 Because the colors you have ordered do not meet European standards ,  he replied .
 Well ,  I told him ,  the surroundings do not meet European standards , even though this is not what we want , but we will choose the colors ourselves , because this is exactly what we want .
And if you do not let us continue with our work , I will hold a press conference here , right now , right in this road , and we will tell people that you look to me just like the censors of the socialist realism era . 
Then he was kind of troubled , and asked me for a compromise .
But I told him no , Im sorry , compromise in colors is gray , and we have enough gray to last us a lifetime .
So its time for change .
The rehabilitation of public spaces revived the feeling of belonging to a city that people lost .
The pride of people about their own place of living , and there were feelings that had been buried deep for years under the fury of the illegal , barbaric constructions that sprang up in the public space .
And when colors came out everywhere , a mood of change started transforming the spirit of people .
Big noise raised up :  What is this ? What is happening ?
What are colors doing to us ? 
And we made a poll , the most fascinating poll Ive seen in my life .
We asked people ,  Do you want this action , and to have buildings painted like that ? 
And then the second question was ,  Do you want it to stop or do you want it to continue ? 
To the first question , 63 percent of people said yes , we like it .
Thirty - seven said no , we dont like it .
But to the second question , half of them that didnt like it , they wanted it to continue .
So we noticed change .
People started to drop less litter in the streets , for example , started to pay taxes , started to feel something they had forgotten , and beauty was acting as a guardsman where municipal police , or the state itself , were missing .
One day I remember walking along a street that had just been colored , and where we were in the process of planting trees , when I saw a shopkeeper and his wife putting a glass facade to their shop .
They had thrown the old shutter in the garbage collection place .
 Why did you throw away the shutters ?  I asked him .
 Well , because the street is safer now ,  they answered .
 Safer ? Why ? They have posted more policemen here ? 
 Come on , man ! What policemen ?
You can see it for yourself . There are colors , streetlights , new pavement with no potholes , trees . So its beautiful ; its safe . 
And indeed , it was beauty that was giving people this feeling of being protected .
And this was not a misplaced feeling .
Crime did fall .
The freedom that was won in 1990 brought about a state of anarchy in the city , while the barbarism of the 90s brought about a loss of hope for the city .
The paint on the walls did not feed children , nor did it tend the sick or educate the ignorant , but it gave hope and light , and helped to make people see there could be a different way of doing things , a different spirit , a different feel to our lives , and that if we brought the same energy and hope to our politics , we could build a better life for each other and for our country .
We removed 123,000 tons of concrete only from the riverbanks .
We demolished more than 5,000 illegal buildings all over the city , up to eight stories high , the tallest of them .
We planted 55,000 trees and bushes in the streets .
We established a green tax , and then everybody accepted it and all businessmen paid it regularly .
By means of open competitions , we managed to recruit in our administration many young people , and we thus managed to build a de - politicized public institution where men and women were equally represented .
International organizations have invested a lot in Albania during these 20 years , not all of it well spent .
When I told the World Bank directors that I wanted them to finance a project to build a model reception hall for citizens precisely in order to fight endemic daily corruption , they did not understand me .
But people were waiting in long queues under sun and under rain in order to get a certificate or just a simple answer from two tiny windows of two metal kiosks .
They were paying in order to skip the queue , the long queue .
The reply to their requests was met by a voice coming from this dark hole , and , on the other hand , a mysterious hand coming out to take their documents while searching through old documents for the bribe .
We could change the invisible clerks within the kiosks , every week , but we could not change this corrupt practice .
 Im convinced ,  I told a German official with the World Bank ,  that it would be impossible for them to be bribed if they worked in Germany , in a German administration , just as I am convinced that if you put German officials from the German administration in those holes , they would be bribed just the same . 
Its not about genes .
Its not about some being with a high conscience and some others having not a conscience .
Its about system , its about organization .
Its also about environment and respect .
We removed the kiosks .
We built the bright new reception hall that made people , Tirana citizens , think they had traveled abroad when they entered to make their requests .
We created an online system of control and so speeded up all the processes .
We put the citizen first , and not the clerks .
The corruption in the state administration of countries like Albania  -  -  its not up to me to say also like Greece  -  -  can be fought only by modernization .
Reinventing the government by reinventing politics itself is the answer , and not reinventing people based on a ready - made formula that the developed world often tries in vain to impose to people like us .
Things have come to this point because politicians in general , but especially in our countries , lets face it , think people are stupid .
They take it for granted that , come what may , people have to follow them , while politics , more and more , fails to offer answers for their public concerns or the exigencies of the common people .
Politics has come to resemble a cynical team game played by politicians , while the public has been pushed aside as if sitting on the seats of a stadium in which passion for politics is gradually making room for blindness and desperation .
Seen from those stairs , all politicians today seem the same , and politics has come to resemble a sport that inspires more aggressiveness and pessimism than social cohesion and the desire for civic protaganism .
Barack Obama won — — because he mobilized people as never before through the use of social networks .
He did not know each and every one of them , but with an admirable ingenuity , he managed to transform them into activists by giving them all the possibility to hold in their hands the arguments and the instruments that each would need to campaign in his name by making his own campaign .
I tweet . I love it .
I love it because it lets me get the message out , but it also lets people get their messages to me .
This is politics , not from top down , but from the bottom up , and sideways , and allowing everybodys voice to be heard is exactly what we need .
Politics is not just about leaders .
Its not just about politicians and laws .
It is about how people think , how they view the world around them , how they use their time and their energy .
When people say all politicians are the same , ask yourself if Obama was the same as Bush , if François Hollande is the same as Sarkozy .
They are not . They are human beings with different views and different visions for the world .
When people say nothing can change , just stop and think what the world was like 10 , 20 , 50 , 100 years ago .
Our world is defined by the pace of change .
We can all change the world .
I gave you a very small example of how one thing , the use of color , can make change happen .
I want to make more change as Prime Minister of my country , but every single one of you can make change happen if you want to .
President Roosevelt , he said ,  Believe you can , and you are halfway there . 
Efharisto and kalinihta .
Dan Meyer : Math class needs a makeover
Todays math curriculum is teaching students to expect  -  -  and excel at  -  -  paint - by - numbers classwork , robbing kids of a skill more important than solving problems : formulating them . In his talk , Dan Meyer shows classroom - tested math exercises that prompt students to stop and think . 
Can I ask you to please recall a time when you really loved something  -  -  a movie , an album , a song or a book  -  -  and you recommended it wholeheartedly to someone you also really liked , and you anticipated that reaction , you waited for it , and it came back , and the person hated it ?
So , by way of introduction , that is the exact same state in which I spent every working day of the last six years .
I teach high school math .
I sell a product to a market that doesnt want it , but is forced by law to buy it .
I mean , its just a losing proposition .
So theres a useful stereotype about students that I see , a useful stereotype about you all .
I could give you guys an algebra - two final exam , and I would expect no higher than a 25 percent pass rate .
And both of these facts say less about you or my students than they do about what we call math education in the U.S . today .
To start with , Id like to break math down into two categories .
One is computation ; this is the stuff youve forgotten .
For example , factoring quadratics with leading coefficients greater than one .
This stuff is also really easy to relearn , provided you have a really strong grounding in reasoning . Math reasoning  -  -  well call it the application of math processes to the world around us  -  -  this is hard to teach .
This is what we would love students to retain , even if they dont go into mathematical fields .
This is also something that , the way we teach it in the U.S .
all but ensures they wont retain it .
So , Id like to talk about why that is , why thats such a calamity for society , what we can do about it and , to close with , why this is an amazing time to be a math teacher .
So first , five symptoms that youre doing math reasoning wrong in your classroom .
One is a lack of initiative ; your students dont self - start .
You finish your lecture block and immediately you have five hands going up asking you to re - explain the entire thing at their desks .
Students lack perseverance .
They lack retention ; you find yourself re - explaining concepts three months later , wholesale .
Theres an aversion to word problems , which describes 99 percent of my students .
And then the other one percent is eagerly looking for the formula to apply in that situation .
This is really destructive .
David Milch , creator of  Deadwood  and other amazing TV shows , has a really good description for this .
He swore off creating contemporary drama , shows set in the present day , because he saw that when people fill their mind with four hours a day of , for example ,  Two and a Half Men ,  no disrespect , it shapes the neural pathways , he said , in such a way that they expect simple problems .
He called it ,  an impatience with irresolution . 
Youre impatient with things that dont resolve quickly .
You expect sitcom - sized problems that wrap up in 22 minutes , three commercial breaks and a laugh track .
And Ill put it to all of you , what you already know , that no problem worth solving is that simple .
I am very concerned about this because Im going to retire in a world that my students will run .
Im doing bad things to my own future and well - being when I teach this way .
Im here to tell you that the way our textbooks  -  -  particularly mass - adopted textbooks  -  -  teach math reasoning and patient problem solving , its functionally equivalent to turning on  Two and a Half Men  and calling it a day .
In all seriousness . Heres an example from a physics textbook .
It applies equally to math .
Notice , first of all here , that you have exactly three pieces of information there , each of which will figure into a formula somewhere , eventually , which the student will then compute .
I believe in real life .
And ask yourself , what problem have you solved , ever , that was worth solving where you knew all of the given information in advance ; where you didnt have a surplus of information and you had to filter it out , or you didnt have sufficient information and had to go find some .
Im sure we all agree that no problem worth solving is like that .
And the textbook , I think , knows how its hamstringing students because , watch this , this is the practice problem set .
When it comes time to do the actual problem set , we have problems like this right here where were just swapping out numbers and tweaking the context a little bit .
And if the student still doesnt recognize the stamp this was molded from , it helpfully explains to you what sample problem you can return to to find the formula .
You could literally , I mean this , pass this particular unit without knowing any physics , just knowing how to decode a textbook . Thats a shame .
So I can diagnose the problem a little more specifically in math .
Heres a really cool problem . I like this .
Its about defining steepness and slope using a ski lift .
But what you have here is actually four separate layers , and Im curious which of you can see the four separate layers and , particularly , how when theyre compressed together and presented to the student all at once , how that creates this impatient problem solving .
Ill define them here : You have the visual .
You also have the mathematical structure , talking about grids , measurements , labels , points , axes , that sort of thing .
You have substeps , which all lead to what we really want to talk about : which section is the steepest .
So I hope you can see .
I really hope you can see how what were doing here is taking a compelling question , a compelling answer , but were paving a smooth , straight path from one to the other and congratulating our students for how well they can step over the small cracks in the way .
Thats all were doing here .
So I want to put to you that if we can separate these in a different way and build them up with students , we can have everything were looking for in terms of patient problem solving .
So right here I start with the visual , and I immediately ask the question : Which section is the steepest ?
And this starts conversation because the visual is created in such a way where you can defend two answers .
So you get people arguing against each other , friend versus friend , in pairs , journaling , whatever .
And then eventually we realize its getting annoying to talk about the skier in the lower left - hand side of the screen or the skier just above the mid line .
And we realize how great would it be if we just had some A , B , C and D labels to talk about them more easily .
And then as we start to define what does steepness mean , we realize it would be nice to have some measurements to really narrow it down , specifically what that means .
And then and only then , we throw down that mathematical structure .
The math serves the conversation , the conversation doesnt serve the math .
And at that point , Ill put it to you that nine out of 10 classes are good to go on the whole slope , steepness thing .
But if you need to , your students can then develop those substeps together .
Do you guys see how this , right here , compared to that  -  -  which one creates that patient problem solving , that math reasoning ?
Its been obvious in my practice , to me .
And Ill yield the floor here for a second to Einstein , who , I believe , has paid his dues .
He talked about the formulation of a problem being so incredibly important , and yet in my practice , in the U.S . here , we just give problems to students ; we dont involve them in the formulation of the problem .
So 90 percent of what I do with my five hours of prep time per week is to take fairly compelling elements of problems like this from my textbook and rebuild them in a way that supports math reasoning and patient problem solving .
And heres how it works .
I like this question . Its about a water tank .
The question is : How long will it take you to fill it up ?
First things first , we eliminate all the substeps .
Students have to develop those , they have to formulate those .
And then notice that all the information written on there is stuff youll need .
None of its a distractor , so we lose that .
Students need to decide ,  All right , well , does the height matter ? Does the side of it matter ?
Does the color of the valve matter ? What matters here ? 
Such an underrepresented question in math curriculum .
So now we have a water tank .
How long will it take you to fill it up ? And thats it .
And because this is the 21st century and we would love to talk about the real world on its own terms , not in terms of line art or clip art that you so often see in textbooks , we go out and we take a picture of it .
So now we have the real deal .
How long will it take it to fill it up ?
And then even better is we take a video , a video of someone filling it up .
And its filling up slowly , agonizingly slowly .
Its tedious .
Students are looking at their watches , rolling their eyes , and theyre all wondering at some point or another ,  Man , how long is it going to take to fill up ? 
Thats how you know youve baited the hook , right ?
And that question , off this right here , is really fun for me because , like the intro , I teach kids  -  -  because of my inexperience  -  -  I teach the kids that are the most remedial , all right ?
And Ive got kids who will not join a conversation about math because someone else has the formula ; someone else knows how to work the formula better than me , so I wont talk about it .
But here , every student is on a level playing field of intuition .
Everyones filled something up with water before , so I get kids answering the question ,  How long will it take ? 
Ive got kids who are mathematically and conversationally intimidated joining the conversation .
We put names on the board , attach them to guesses , and kids have bought in here .
And then we follow the process Ive described .
And the best part here , or one of the better parts is that we dont get our answer from the answer key in the back of the teachers edition .
We , instead , just watch the end of the movie .
And thats terrifying , because the theoretical models that always work out in the answer key in the back of a teachers edition , thats great , but its scary to talk about sources of error when the theoretical does not match up with the practical .
But those conversations have been so valuable , among the most valuable .
So Im here to report some really fun games with students who come pre - installed with these viruses day one of the class .
These are the kids who now , one semester in , I can put something on the board , totally new , totally foreign , and theyll have a conversation about it for three or four minutes more than they would have at the start of the year , which is just so fun .
Were no longer averse to word problems , because weve redefined what a word problem is .
Were no longer intimidated by math , because were slowly redefining what math is .
This has been a lot of fun .
I encourage math teachers I talk to to use multimedia , because it brings the real world into your classroom in high resolution and full color ; to encourage student intuition for that level playing field ; to ask the shortest question you possibly can and let those more specific questions come out in conversation ; to let students build the problem , because Einstein said so ; and to finally , in total , just be less helpful , because the textbook is helping you in all the wrong ways : Its buying you out of your obligation , for patient problem solving and math reasoning , to be less helpful .
And why this is an amazing time to be a math teacher right now is because we have the tools to create this high - quality curriculum in our front pocket .
Its ubiquitous and fairly cheap , and the tools to distribute it freely under open licenses has also never been cheaper or more ubiquitous .
I put a video series on my blog not so long ago and it got 6,000 views in two weeks .
I get emails still from teachers in countries Ive never visited saying ,  Wow , yeah . We had a good conversation about that .
Oh , and by the way , heres how I made your stuff better ,  which , wow .
I put this problem on my blog recently : In a grocery store , which line do you get into , the one that has one cart and 19 items or the line with four carts and three , five , two and one items .
And the linear modeling involved in that was some good stuff for my classroom , but it eventually got me on  Good Morning America  a few weeks later , which is just bizarre , right ?
And from all of this , I can only conclude that people , not just students , are really hungry for this .
Math makes sense of the world .
Math is the vocabulary for your own intuition .
So I just really encourage you , whatever your stake is in education  -  -  whether youre a student , parent , teacher , policy maker , whatever  -  -  insist on better math curriculum .
We need more patient problem solvers . Thank you .
Nellie McKay :  Mother of Pearl ,   If I Had You 
The wonderful Nellie McKay sings  Mother of Pearl  and  If I Had You  from her sparkling set at TED2008 .
Feminists dont have a sense of humor . Feminists just want to be alone  -  -  boo hoo , hoo , hoo . Feminists spread vicious lies and rumors . They have a tumor on their funny bone . They say child molestation isnt funny  -  -  ha , ha , ha , ha . Rape and degradations just a crime  -  -  lighten up , ladies . Rampant prostitutions sex for money  -  -  whats wrong with that ? Cant these chicks do anything but whine ? Dance break ! Da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da . Da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da . Woo - hoo ! Da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da  -  -  yeah , take it off . Da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , dum . They say cheap objectification isnt witty  -  -  its hot ! Equal work and wages worth the fight  -  -  sing us a new one . On - demand abortion every city  -  -  OK , but no gun control . Wont these women ever get a life ? Feminists dont have a sense of humor  -  -  poor Hillary . Feminists and vegetarians  -  -  make mine a Big Mac . Feminists spread vicious lies and rumors . Theyre far too sensitive to ever be a ham , thats why these feminists just need to find a man . Da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da , da . Im Dennis Kucinich and I approved this message .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Thank you .
I asked my mother , you know , should I say anything in support of anyone ?
And she said ,  Oh no ! Just dis everybody , except Ralph Nader . 
I could show the world how to smile , I could be glad all of the while . I could turn the gray skies to blue , if I had you . I could leave the old days behind , leave all my pals , Id never mind . I could start my life all anew , if I had you . I could climb the snow - capped mountains , sail the mighty ocean wide . I could cross the burning desert , if I had you by my side . I could be a king , dear , uncrowned , humble or poor , rich or renowned . There is nothing I couldnt do , if I had you . Thank you . Well , thank you so much .
Mariana Mazzucato : Government  -  -  investor , risk - taker , innovator
Why doesnt the government just get out of the way and let the private sector  -  -  the  real revolutionaries   -  -  innovate ? Its rhetoric you hear everywhere , and Mariana Mazzucato wants to dispel it . In an energetic talk , she shows how the state  -  -  which many see as a slow , hunkering behemoth  -  -  is really one of our most exciting risk - takers and market - shapers .
Have you ever asked yourselves why it is that companies , the really cool companies , the innovative ones , the creative , new economy - type companies  -  -  Apple , Google , Facebook  -  -  are coming out of one particular country , the United States of America ?
Usually when I say this , someone says ,  Spotify !
Thats Europe .  But , yeah .
It has not had the impact that these other companies have had .
Now what I do is Im an economist , and I actually study the relationship between innovation and economic growth at the level of the company , the industry and the nation , and I work with policymakers worldwide , especially in the European Commission , but recently also in interesting places like China , and I can tell you that that question is on the tip of all of their tongues : Where are the European Googles ?
What is the secret behind the Silicon Valley growth model , which they understand is different from this old economy growth model ?
And what is interesting is that often , even if were in the 21st century , we kind of come down in the end to these ideas of market versus state .
Its talked about in these modern ways , but the idea is that somehow , behind places like Silicon Valley , the secret have been different types of market - making mechanisms , the private initiative , whether this be about a dynamic venture capital sector thats actually able to provide that high - risk finance to these innovative companies , the gazelles as we often call them , which traditional banks are scared of , or different types of really successful commercialization policies which actually allow these companies to bring these great inventions , their products , to the market and actually get over this really scary Death Valley period in which many companies instead fail .
But what really interests me , especially nowadays and because of whats happening politically around the world , is the language thats used , the narrative , the discourse , the images , the actual words .
So we often are presented with the kind of words like that the private sector is also much more innovative because its able to think out of the box .
They are more dynamic .
Think of Steve Jobs really inspirational speech to the 2005 graduating class at Stanford , where he said to be innovative , youve got to stay hungry , stay foolish .
Right ? So these guys are kind of the hungry and foolish and colorful guys , right ?
And in places like Europe , it might be more equitable , we might even be a bit better dressed and eat better than the U.S . , but the problem is this damn public sector .
Its a bit too big , and it hasnt actually allowed these things like dynamic venture capital and commercialization to actually be able to really be as fruitful as it could .
And even really respectable newspapers , some that Im actually subscribed to , the words they use are , you know , the state as this Leviathan . Right ?
This monster with big tentacles .
Theyre very explicit in these editorials .
They say ,  You know , the state , its necessary to fix these little market failures when you have public goods or different types of negative externalities like pollution , but you know what , what is the next big revolution going to be after the Internet ?
We all hope it might be something green , or all of this nanotech stuff , and in order for that stuff to happen ,  they say  -  -  this was a special issue on the next industrial revolution  -  -  they say ,  the state , just stick to the basics , right ?
Fund the infrastructure . Fund the schools .
Even fund the basic research , because this is popularly recognized , in fact , as a big public good which private companies dont want to invest in , do that , but you know what ?
Leave the rest to the revolutionaries . 
Those colorful , out - of - the - box kind of thinkers .
Theyre often called garage tinkerers , because some of them actually did some things in garages , even though thats partly a myth .
And so what I want to do with you in , oh God , only 10 minutes , is to really think again this juxtaposition , because it actually has massive , massive implications beyond innovation policy , which just happens to be the area that I often talk with with policymakers .
It has huge implications , even with this whole notion that we have on where , when and why we should actually be cutting back on public spending and different types of public services which , of course , as we know , are increasingly being outsourced because of this juxtaposition .
Right ? I mean , the reason that we need to maybe have free schools or charter schools is in order to make them more innovative without being emburdened by this heavy hand of the state curriculum , or something .
So these kind of words are constantly , these juxtapositions come up everywhere , not just with innovation policy .
And so to think again , theres no reason that you should believe me , so just think of some of the smartest revolutionary things that you have in your pockets and do not turn it on , but you might want to take it out , your IPhone .
Ask who actually funded the really cool , revolutionary thinking - out - of - the - box things in the IPhone .
What actually makes your phone a smartphone , basically , instead of a stupid phone ?
So the Internet , which you can surf the web anywhere you are in the world ; GPS , where you can actually know where you are anywhere in the world ; the touchscreen display , which makes it also a really easy - to - use phone for anybody .
These are the very smart , revolutionary bits about the IPhone , and theyre all government - funded .
And the point is that the Internet was funded by DARPA , U.S . Department of Defense .
GPS was funded by the militarys Navstar program .
Even Siri was actually funded by DARPA .
The touchscreen display was funded by two public grants by the CIA and the NSF to two public university researchers at the University of Delaware .
Now , you might be thinking ,  Well , shes just said the word defense and military an awful lot ,  but whats really interesting is that this is actually true in sector after sector and department after department .
So the pharmaceutical industry , which I am personally very interested in because Ive actually had the fortune to study it in quite some depth , is wonderful to be asking this question about the revolutionary versus non - revolutionary bits , because each and every medicine can actually be divided up on whether it really is revolutionary or incremental .
So the new molecular entities with priority rating are the revolutionary new drugs , whereas the slight variations of existing drugs  -  -  Viagra , different color , different dosage  -  -  are the less revolutionary ones .
And it turns out that a full 75 percent of the new molecular entities with priority rating are actually funded in boring , Kafkian public sector labs .
This doesnt mean that Big Pharma is not spending on innovation .
They do . They spend on the marketing part .
They spend on the D part of R and D .
They spend an awful lot on buying back their stock , which is quite problematic .
In fact , companies like Pfizer and Amgen recently have spent more money in buying back their shares to boost their stock price than on R and D , but thats a whole different TED Talk which one day Id be fascinated to tell you about .
Now , whats interesting in all of this is the state , in all these examples , was doing so much more than just fixing market failures .
It was actually shaping and creating markets .
It was funding not only the basic research , which again is a typical public good , but even the applied research .
It was even , God forbid , being a venture capitalist .
So these SBIR and SDTR programs , which give small companies early - stage finance have not only been extremely important compared to private venture capital , but also have become increasingly important .
Why ? Because , as many of us know , V.C . is actually quite short - term .
They want their returns in three to five years .
Innovation takes a much longer time than that , 15 to 20 years .
And so this whole notion  -  -  I mean , this is the point , right ?
Whos actually funding the hard stuff ?
Of course , its not just the state .
The private sector does a lot .
But the narrative that weve always been told is the state is important for the basics , but not really providing that sort of high - risk , revolutionary thinking out of the box .
In all these sectors , from funding the Internet to doing the spending , but also the envisioning , the strategic vision , for these investments , it was actually coming within the state .
The nanotechnology sector is actually fascinating to study this , because the word itself , nanotechnology , came from within government .
And so theres huge implications of this .
First of all , of course Im not someone , this old - fashioned person , market versus state .
What we all know in dynamic capitalism is that what we actually need are public - private partnerships .
But the point is , by constantly depicting the state part as necessary but actually  -  -  pffff  -  -  a bit boring and often a bit dangerous kind of Leviathan , I think weve actually really stunted the possibility to build these public - private partnerships in a really dynamic way .
Even the words that we often use to justify the  P  part , the public part  -  -  well , theyre both Ps  -  -  with public - private partnerships is in terms of de - risking .
What the public sector did in all these examples I just gave you , and theres many more , which myself and other colleagues have been looking at , is doing much more than de - risking .
Its kind of been taking on that risk . Bring it on .
Its actually been the one thinking out of the box .
But also , Im sure you all have had experience with local , regional , national governments , and youre kind of like ,  You know what , that Kafkian bureaucrat , Ive met him . 
That whole juxtaposition thing , its kind of there .
Well , theres a self - fulfilling prophecy .
By talking about the state as kind of irrelevant , boring , its sometimes that we actually create those organizations in that way .
So what we have to actually do is build these entrepreneurial state organizations .
DARPA , that funded the Internet and Siri , actually thought really hard about this , how to welcome failure , because you will fail .
You will fail when you innovative .
One out of 10 experiments has any success .
And the V.C . guys know this , and theyre able to actually fund the other losses from that one success .
And this brings me , actually , probably , to the biggest implication , and this has huge implications beyond innovation .
If the state is more than just a market fixer , if it actually is a market shaper , and in doing that has had to take on this massive risk , what happened to the reward ?
We all know , if youve ever taken a finance course , the first thing youre taught is sort of the risk - reward relationship , and so some people are foolish enough or probably smart enough if they have time to wait , to actually invest in stocks , because theyre higher risk which over time will make a greater reward than bonds , that whole risk - reward thing .
Well , wheres the reward for the state of having taken on these massive risks and actually been foolish enough to have done the Internet ?
The Internet was crazy .
It really was . I mean , the probability of failure was massive .
You had to be completely nuts to do it , and luckily , they were .
Now , we dont even get to this question about rewards unless you actually depict the state as this risk - taker .
And the problem is that economists often think , well , there is a reward back to the state . Its tax .
You know , the companies will pay tax , the jobs they create will create growth so people who get those jobs and their incomes rise will come back to the state through the tax mechanism .
Well , unfortunately , thats not true .
Okay , its not true because many of the jobs that are created go abroad .
Globalization , and thats fine . We shouldnt be nationalistic .
Let the jobs go where they have to go , perhaps .
I mean , one can take a position on that .
But also these companies that have actually had this massive benefit from the state  -  -  Apples a great example .
They even got the first  -  -  well , not the first , but 500,000 dollars actually went to Apple , the company , through this SBIC program , which predated the SBIR program , as well as , as I said before , all the technologies behind the IPhone .
And yet we know they legally , as many other companies , pay very little tax back .
So what we really need to actually rethink is should there perhaps be a return - generating mechanism thats much more direct than tax . Why not ?
It could happen perhaps through equity .
This , by the way , in the countries that are actually thinking about this strategically , countries like Finland in Scandinavia , but also in China and Brazil , theyre retaining equity in these investments .
Sitra funded Nokia , kept equity , made a lot of money , its a public funding agency in Finland , which then funded the next round of Nokias .
The Brazilian Development Bank , which is providing huge amounts of funds today to clean technology , they just announced a 56 billion program for the future on this , is retaining equity in these investments .
So to put it provocatively , had the U.S . government thought about this , and maybe just brought back just something called an innovation fund , you can bet that , you know , if even just .05 percent of the profits from what the Internet produced had come back to that innovation fund , there would be so much more money to spend today on green technology .
Instead , many of the state budgets which in theory are trying to do that are being constrained .
But perhaps even more important , we heard before about the one percent , the 99 percent .
If the state is thought about in this more strategic way , as one of the lead players in the value creation mechanism , because thats what were talking about , right ?
Who are the different players in creating value in the economy , and is the states role , has it been sort of dismissed as being a backseat player ?
If we can actually have a broader theory of value creation and allow us to actually admit what the state has been doing and reap something back , it might just be that in the next round , and I hope that we all hope that the next big revolution will in fact be green , that that period of growth will not only be smart , innovation - led , not only green , but also more inclusive , so that the public schools in places like Silicon Valley can actually also benefit from that growth , because they have not .
Thank you .
Jennifer 8 . Lee : The hunt for General Tso
Reporter Jennifer 8 . Lee talks about her hunt for the origins of familiar Chinese - American dishes  -  -  exploring the hidden spots where these two cultures have combined to form a new cuisine .
There are more Chinese restaurants in this country than McDonalds , Burger King , Kentucky Fried Chicken and Wendys , combined  -  -  40,000 , actually .
Chinese restaurants have played an important role in American history , as a matter of fact .
The Cuban missile crisis was resolved in a Chinese restaurant called Yenching Palace in Washington , D.C . , which unfortunately is closed now , and about to be turned into Walgreens .
And the house that John Wilkes Booth planned the assassination of Abraham Lincoln is actually also now a Chinese restaurant called Wok n Roll , on H Street in Washington .
And its not completely gratuitous , because wok and roll  -  -  Chinese food and Japanese foods , so it kind of works out .
And Americans love their Chinese food so much theyve actually brought it into space .
NASA , for example , serves thermal - stabilized sweet - and - sour pork on its shuttle menu for its astronauts .
So , let me present the question to you : If our benchmark for Americanness is apple pie , you should ask yourself , how often do you eat apple pie , versus how often do you eat Chinese food . Right ?
And if you think about it , a lot of the foods that you think of or we think of or Americans think of as Chinese food are barely recognizable to Chinese , for example : beef with broccoli , egg rolls , General Tsos Chicken , fortune cookies , chop suey , the take - out boxes .
For example , I took a whole bunch of fortune cookies back to China , gave them to Chinese to see how they would react .
What is this ?
Should I try it ?
Try it !
What is it called ?
Fortune cookie .
Theres a piece of paper inside !
What is this ?
Youve won a prize !
What is this ?
Its a fortune !
Tasty !
So , where are they from ?
The short answer is , actually , theyre from Japan .
And in Kyoto , outside , there are still small family - run bakeries that make fortune cookies , as they did over 100 years ago , 30 years before fortune cookies were introduced in the United States .
If you see them side by side , theres yellow and brown .
Theirs are actually flavored with miso and sesame paste , so theyre not as sweet as our version .
So , how did they get to the United States ?
Well , the short answer is , the Japanese immigrants came over , and a bunch of the bakers introduced them  -  -  including at least one in Los Angeles , and one here in San Francisco called Benkyo - do , which is on the corner of Sutter and Buchanan .
They back then , actually , made fortune cookies using very much the similar kind of irons that we saw back in Kyoto .
So , the interesting question is , how do you go from fortune cookies being something that is Japanese to being something that is Chinese ?
Well , the short answer is , we locked up all the Japanese during World War II , including those that made fortune cookies , so thats the time when the Chinese moved in , kind of saw a market opportunity and took over .
So , fortune cookies : invented by the Japanese , popularized by the Chinese , but ultimately consumed by Americans .
They are more American than anything else .
Another one of my favorite dishes : General Tsos Chicken  -  -  which , by the way , in the US Naval Academy is called Admiral Tsos Chicken .
I love this dish .
The original name in my book was actually called The Long March of General Tso , and he has marched very far indeed , because he is sweet , he is fried , and he is chicken  -  -  all things that Americans love .
He has marched so far , actually , that the chef who originally invented the dish doesnt recognize it ; hes kind of horrified .
Hes in Taiwan right now .
Hes retired , deaf and plays a lot of Mahjong .
So , he  -  -  after this I showed him , he got up , and hes like ,  Mominqimiao ,  which means ,  This is all nonsense ,  and goes back to play his Mahjong game during the afternoon .
So , another dish . One of my favorites . Beef with broccoli .
Broccoli is not a Chinese vegetable ; in fact , it is originally an Italian vegetable .
It was introduced into the United States in the 1800s , but became popularized in the 1920s and the 1930s .
In fact , the Chinese had their own version of broccoli , which is called Chinese broccoli , but right now , what  -  -  theyve now discovered American broccoli , and are importing it as a , sort of , exotic delicacy .
I guarantee you , General Tso never saw a stalk of broccoli in his life  -  -  and indeed , that actually was a picture of General Tso .
I went to his home town .
This is a billboard that says :  Welcome to the birthplace of General Tso . 
And I went looking for chicken .
Finally found a cow  -  -  and did find chicken .
Believe it or not , these guys were actually crossing the road .
And  -  -   -  -  I actually found a whole bunch of General Tsos relatives who are still in the little town .
This guy is now five generations removed from the General ; this guy is about seven .
Showed them all the pictures of General Tso Chicken that I showed you , and theyre like , we dont know this dish .
And then theyre like , is this Chinese food ?
Because it doesnt look like Chinese food to them .
But they werent kind of surprised I traveled around the world to visit them , because in their eyes he is , after all , a famous Qing dynasty military hero .
He played an important role in the Taiping rebellion , which was a war started by a guy who thought he was the son of God and the baby brother of Jesus Christ .
And caused the war that killed 20 million people  -  -  still the deadliest civil war in the world to this day .
So , you know , I realized when I was there , General Tso is kind of a lot like Colonel Sanders in America , in that hes known for chicken and not war .
But in China , this guys actually known for war and not chicken .
But the granddaddy of all the Chinese - American dishes we probably ought to talk about is chop suey , which was introduced around the turn of the 20th century .
And according to New York Times , in 1904 , there was an outbreak of Chinese restaurants all over town , and  the city has gone chop suey mad . 
So it took about 30 years before the Americans realized that , whoa , chop suey is actually not known in China .
And as this article points out ,  The average native of any city in China knows nothing of chop suey . 
You know , back then it was a way to show that you were sophisticated and cosmopolitan : if you were a guy and you wanted to impress a girl , you could take her out on a chop suey date .
I like to say chop sueys the biggest culinary joke that one culture has ever played on another , because chop suey , if you translate into Chinese , means tsap sui , which , if you translate back , means  odds and ends . 
So , these people are going around China asking for chop suey , which is sort of like a Japanese guy coming here and saying , I understand you have a very popular dish in your country called  leftovers ,  and it is particularly  -  -   -  -  right ?
And not only that : this dish is particularly popular after that holiday you call Thanksgiving .
So , why  -  -  why and where  -  -  did chop suey come from ?
Lets go back to mid - 1800s when the Chinese first came to America .
Now back then , the Americans were not clamoring to eat Chinese food .
In fact , they saw this people who landed at their shores as alien .
These people werent eating dogs  -  -  they were eating cats  -  -  and they werent eating cats  -  -  they were eating rats .
In fact , The New York Times , my esteemed employer , in 1883 ran an article that asked ,  Do Chinese eat rats ? 
And not the most PC question to be asked today , but if you kind of look at the popular imagery of the time , not so outlandish .
This is actually a real advertisement for rat poison from the late 1800s , and if you see , under the word  Clears   -  -  very small  -  -  it says ,  They must go ,  which refers not only to the rats , but to the Chinese in their midst , because the way that the food was perceived was that these people who ate foods different from us must be different from us .
And another way that you saw , sort of , this sort of , this antipathy towards the Chinese is through documents like this .
This is actually in the Library of Congress ; it is a pamphlet published by Samuel Gompers , hero of our American labor movement , and its called ,  Some Reason for Chinese Exclusion : Meat versus Rice : American Manhood against Asiatic Coolieism : Which shall survive ?
And it basically made the argument that Chinese men who ate rice would necessarily bring down the standard of living for American men who ate meat .
And as a matter of fact , then , this is one of the reasons why we must exclude them from this country So , with sentiments like these , the Chinese Exclusion Act was sort of passed between 1882 and 1902 , the only time in American history when a group was specifically excluded for its national origin or ethnicity .
So , in a way , because the Chinese were attacked , chop suey was created as a defense mechanism .
Now , who came up with the idea of chop suey ?
Theres a lot of different mysteries , a lot of different legends , but of the ones that Ive found that I thought was most interesting is this article from 1904 .
A Chinese guy named Lem Sen shows up in Chinatown , New York City , and says , I want you guys all to stop making chop suey , because I am the original creator and sole proprietor of the dish known as chop suey .
And the way that he tells it , there was a guy , there was a famous Chinese diplomat that showed up , and he was told to make a dish that looked very popular and could , quote ,  pass  as Chinese .
And as he said  -  -  we would never print this today  -  -  but basically , the American man has become very rich .
Lem Sen , whos this guy : I would have made this money , too , but Ive spent all this time looking for the American man who stole my recipe .
Now Ive come and found him , and I want my recipe back and I want everyone to stop making chop suey , or pay me for the right to do the same .
So it was an early exercise of intellectual property rights .
So the thing is , this kind of idea of Chinese - American food doesnt exist only in America .
In fact , if you think about it , Chinese food is the most pervasive food on the planet , served on all seven continents , even Antarctica , because Monday night is Chinese food night at McMurdo Station , which is the main scientific station in Antarctica .
So , you see different varieties of Chinese food .
For example , there is French Chinese food , where they serve salt and pepper frog legs .
There is Italian Chinese food , where they dont have fortune cookies , so they serve fried gelato .
My downstairs neighbor , Alessandra , was completely shocked when I told her ,  Dude , fried gelato is not Chinese . 
Shes like ,  Its not ?
But they serve it in all the Chinese restaurants in Italy . 
And even the Brits have their own version .
This is a dish called crispy shredded beef , which has a lot of crisp , a lot of shred , and not a lot of beef .
There is West Indian Chinese food , theres Jamaican Chinese food , there is Middle Eastern Chinese food , theres Mauritian Chinese food .
This is a dish called Magic Bowl that I discovered .
Theres Indian Chinese food , Korean Chinese food , Japanese Chinese food , where they take the bao , the little buns , and they make them into pizza versions , and they take  -  -  and they  -  -  like , totally randomly theyll take Chinese noodle dishes , and theyll just Ramen - ize them .
This is , like , this is something that in the Chinese version has no soup .
So , theres Peruvian Chinese food , which should not be mixed with Mexican Chinese food , where they basically take things and make it look like fajitas .
And then  -  -  one thing : they have things like risotto chop suey .
My personal favorite of all the restaurants Ive encountered around the world was this one in Brazil , called  Kung Food . 
So , lets take a step back , and kind of , understand what is to be appreciated in America .
McDonalds has , sort of , garnered a lot of attention , a lot of respect , for basically standardizing the menu , décor and dining experience in post - World War II America .
But you know what ?
They actually did so through a centralized headquarters out of Illinois , right ?
Chinese restaurants have done largely the same thing , I would argue , with the menu and the décor  -  -  even the restaurant name  -  -  but without a centralized headquarters .
So , this actually became very clear to me with the March 30 , 2005 Powerball drawing , where , you know , they expected , based on the number of ticket sales they had , to have three or four second - place winners  -  -  those are the people who match five or six Powerball numbers .
Instead , they had 110 , and they were completely shocked .
They looked all across the country , and discovered it couldnt necessarily be fraud , because it happened , you know , in different states , across different computer systems .
So whatever it was , it caused people to sort of behave in a mass synchronized way .
So , like , OK , maybe it had to do with the patterns on the little pieces of paper  -  -  you know , like , it was a diamond , or , you know , diagonal .
It wasnt that .
It wasnt that , so theyre like , OK , lets look at television , so they looked at an episode of  Lost . 
Now , I dont have a TV , which makes me a freak , but very productive , and  -  -   -  -  and this episode of  Lost ,  I understand , where the overweight guy has a lucky number which was not a lucky number , which was how long theyd been on the island , but they looked , and the numbers did not match .
So they looked at  The Young and The Restless ,  and it wasnt that , either .
So , it wasnt until the first guy shows up the next day , and they ask him ,  Where did you get your number from ? 
Hes like ,  Oh , I got it from a fortune cookie . 
This actually is a slip that one of the winners had , because the Tennessee lottery security officials were like , oh , no  -  -  like , this cant be true .
But it was true , and basically , of those 110 people , and 104 of them or so had gotten their number from the fortune cookie .
Yeah . So , I went and started looking .
I went across the country , looking for these restaurants where these people had gotten their fortune cookies from .
You know , there are a bunch of them , including Lees China in Omaha  -  -  which is actually run by Koreans , but thats another point  -  -  and a bunch of them named China Buffet .
So , whats interesting is that their stories were similar , but they were different .
It was lunch , it was take - out , it was sit - down , it was buffet , it was three weeks ago , it was three months ago .
But at some point , all these people had a very similar experience that converged at a fortune cookie and at a Chinese restaurant , and all these Chinese restaurants were serving fortune cookies , which , of course we know arent even Chinese to begin with .
So its kind of part of the phenomenon I called spontaneous self - organization , right , where , like in ant colonies , where little decisions made by  -  -  on the micro - level actually have a big impact on the macro - level .
So , a good sort of contrast is Chicken McNuggets .
McDonalds actually spent 10 years coming out with a chicken - like product .
They did chicken pot pie , they did fried chicken , and then they finally introduced Chicken McNuggets .
And the great innovation of Chicken McNuggets was not nuggetfying them , because thats kind of an easy concept , but the trick behind Chicken McNuggets was , they were able to remove the chicken from the bone in a cost - effective manner , which is why it took so long for other people to copy them .
It took 10 years , and then within a couple of months , it was such a hit they just introduced it and rolled it across the entire system of McDonalds in the country .
In contrast , we have General Tsos Chicken , which actually started in New York City in the early 1970s , as I was also starting in the university in New York City in the early 1970s , so ...
And this logo !
So me , General Tsos Chicken and this logo are all karmacally related .
But that dish also took about 10 years to spread across America from a random restaurant in New York City .
Someones like , oh , God  -  -  its sweet , its fried , its chicken : Americans will love this .
So , what I like to say , you know , this being sort of Bay Area , Silicon Valley  -  -  is that we think of McDonalds as sort of the Microsoft of the dining experiences .
We can think of Chinese restaurants perhaps as Linux : sort of an open source thing , right , where ideas from one person can be copied and propagated across the entire system , that there can be specialized versions of Chinese food , you know , depending on the region .
For example , you know , in New Orleans we have Cajun Chinese food , where they serve Sichuan alligator and sweet and sour crawfish , right ?
And in Philadelphia , you have Philadelphia cheesesteak roll , which looks like an egg roll on the outside , but a cheesesteak on the inside .
I was really surprised to discover that , not only in Philadelphia , but also in Atlanta , because what had happened was that a Chinese family had moved from Atlanta to  -  -  sorry , from Philadelphia to Atlanta , and brought that with them .
So , the thing is , our historical lore , because of the way we like narratives , are full of vast characters such as , you know , Howard Schultz of Starbucks and Ray Kroc with McDonalds and Asa Chandler with Coca - Cola .
But , you know , its very easy to overlook the smaller characters  -  -  oops  -  -  for example , like Lem Sen , who introduced chop suey , Chef Peng , who introduced General Tso Chicken , and all the Japanese bakers who introduced fortune cookies .
So , the point of my presentation is to make you think twice , that those whose names are forgotten in history can often have had as much , if not more , impact on what we eat today .
So . Thank you very much .
Dong Woo Jang : The art of bow - making
Dong Woo Jang has an unusual after school hobby . Jang , who was 15 when he gave the talk , tells the story of how living in the concrete jungle of Seoul inspired him to build the perfect bow . Watch him demo one of his beautiful hand - crafted archers bows .
It is said that the grass is always greener on the other side of the fence , and I believe this is true , especially when I hear President Obama often talk about the Korean education system as a benchmark of success .
Well , I can tell you that , in the rigid structure and highly competitive nature of the Korean school system , also known as pressure cooker , not everyone can do well in that environment .
While many people responded in different ways about our education system , my response to the high - pressure environment was making bows with pieces of wood found near my apartment building .
Why bows ?
Im not quite sure .
Perhaps , in the face of constant pressure , my caveman instinct of survival has connected with the bows .
If you think about it , the bow has really helped drive human survival since prehistoric times .
The area within three kilometers of my home used to be a mulberry forest during the Joseon dynasty , where silkworms were fed with mulberry leaves .
In order to raise the historical awareness of this fact , the government has planted mulberry trees .
The seeds from these trees also have spread by birds here and there nearby the soundproof walls of the city expressway that has been built around the 1988 Olympics .
The area near these walls , which nobody bothers to pay attention to , had been left free from major intervention , and this is where I first found my treasures .
As I fell deeper into bow making , I began to search far and beyond my neighborhood .
When I went on school field trips , family vacations , or simply on my way home from extracurricular classes , I wandered around wooded areas and gathered tree branches with the tools that I sneaked inside my school bag .
And they would be somethings like saws , knives , sickles and axes that I covered up with a piece of towel .
I would bring the branches home , riding buses and subways , barely holding them in my hands .
And I did not bring the tools here to Long Beach .
Airport security .
In the privacy of my room , covered in sawdust , I would saw , trim and polish wood all night long until a bow took shape .
One day , I was changing the shape of a bamboo piece and ended up setting the place on fire .
Where ? The rooftop of my apartment building , a place where 96 families call home .
A customer from a department store across from my building called 911 , and I ran downstairs to tell my mom with half of my hair burned .
I want to take this opportunity to tell my mom , in the audience today : Mom , I was really sorry , and I will be more careful with open fire from now on .
My mother had to do a lot of explaining , telling people that her son did not commit a premeditated arson .
I also researched extensively on bows around the world .
In that process , I tried to combine the different bows from across time and places to create the most effective bow .
I also worked with many different types of wood , such as maple , yew and mulberry , and did many shooting experiments in the wooded area near the urban expressway that I mentioned before .
The most effective bow for me would be like this .
One : Curved tips can maximize the springiness when you draw and shoot the arrow .
Two : Belly is drawn inward for higher draw weight , which means more power .
Three : Sinew used in the outer layer of the limb for maximum tension storage .
And four : Horn used to store energy in compression .
After fixing , breaking , redesigning , mending , bending and amending , my ideal bow began to take shape , and when it was finally done , it looked like this .
I was so proud of myself for inventing a perfect bow on my own .
This is a picture of Korean traditional bows taken from a museum , and see how my bow resembles them .
Thanks to my ancestors for robbing me of my invention .
Through bowmaking , I came in contact with part of my heritage .
Learning the information that has accumulated over time and reading the message left by my ancestors were better than any consolation therapy or piece of advice any living adults could give me .
You see , I searched far and wide , but never bothered to look close and near .
From this realization , I began to take interest in Korean history , which had never inspired me before .
In the end , the grass is often greener on my side of the fence , although we dont realize it .
Now , I am going to show you how my bow works .
And lets see how this one works .
This is a bamboo bow , with 45 - pound draw weights .
A bow may function in a simple mechanism , but in order to make a good bow , a great amount of sensitivity is required .
You need to console and communicate with the wood material .
Each fiber in the wood has its own reason and function for being , and only through cooperation and harmony among them comes a great bow .
I may be an  odd  student with unconventional interests , but I hope I am making a contribution by sharing my story with all of you .
My ideal world is a place where no one is left behind , where everyone is needed exactly where they are , like the fibers and the tendons in a bow , a place where the strong is flexible and the vulnerable is resilient .
The bow resembles me , and I resemble the bow .
Now , I am shooting a part of myself to you .
No , better yet , a part of my mind has just been shot over to your mind .
Did it strike you ?
Thank you .
Erin McKean : The joy of lexicography
Is the beloved paper dictionary doomed to extinction ? In this infectiously exuberant talk , leading lexicographer Erin McKean looks at the many ways todays print dictionary is poised for transformation .
Now , have any of yall ever looked up this word ?
You know , in a dictionary ? Yeah , thats what I thought .
How about this word ?
Here , Ill show it to you .
Lexicography : the practice of compiling dictionaries .
Notice  -  -  were very specific  -  -  that word  compile . 
The dictionary is not carved out of a piece of granite , out of a lump of rock . Its made up of lots of little bits .
Its little discrete  -  -  thats spelled D - I - S - C - R - E - T - E  -  -  bits .
And those bits are words .
Now one of the perks of being a lexicographer  -  -  besides getting to come to TED  -  -  is that you get to say really fun words , like lexicographical .
Lexicographical has this great pattern : its called a double dactyl . And just by saying double dactyl , Ive sent the geek needle all the way into the red .
But  lexicographical  is the same pattern as  higgledy - piggledy . 
Right ? Its a fun word to say , and I get to say it a lot .
Now , one of the non - perks of being a lexicographer is that people dont usually have a kind of warm , fuzzy , snuggly image of the dictionary .
Right ? Nobody hugs their dictionaries .
But what people really often think about the dictionary is , they think more like this .
Just to let you know , I do not have a lexicographical whistle .
But people think that my job is to let the good words make that difficult left - hand turn into the dictionary , and keep the bad words out .
But the thing is , I dont want to be a traffic cop .
For one thing , I just do not do uniforms .
And for another , deciding what words are good and what words are bad is actually not very easy .
And its not very fun . And when parts of your job are not easy or fun , you kind of look for an excuse not to do them .
So if I had to think of some kind of occupation as a metaphor for my work , I would much rather be a fisherman .
I want to throw my big net into the deep , blue ocean of English and see what marvelous creatures I can drag up from the bottom .
But why do people want me to direct traffic , when I would much rather go fishing ?
Well , I blame the Queen .
Why do I blame the Queen ?
Well , first of all , I blame the Queen because its funny .
But secondly , I blame the Queen because dictionaries have really not changed .
Our idea of what a dictionary is has not changed since her reign .
The only thing that Queen Victoria would not be amused by in modern dictionaries is our inclusion of the F - word , which has happened in American dictionaries since 1965 .
So , theres this guy , right ? Victorian era .
James Murray , first editor of the Oxford English Dictionary .
I do not have that hat . I wish I had that hat .
So hes really responsible for a lot of what we consider modern in dictionaries today .
When a guy who looks like that , in that hat , is the face of modernity , you have a problem .
And so , James Murray could get a job on any dictionary today .
Thered be virtually no learning curve .
And of course , a few of us are saying : okay , computers !
Computers ! What about computers ?
The thing about computers is , I love computers .
I mean , Im a huge geek , I love computers .
I would go on a hunger strike before I let them take away Google Book Search from me .
But computers dont do much else other than speed up the process of compiling dictionaries .
They dont change the end result .
Because what a dictionary is , is its Victorian design merged with a little bit of modern propulsion .
Its steampunk . What we have is an electric velocipede .
You know , we have Victorian design with an engine on it . Thats all !
The design has not changed .
And OK , what about online dictionaries , right ?
Online dictionaries must be different .
This is the Oxford English Dictionary Online , one of the best online dictionaries .
This is my favorite word , by the way .
Erinaceous : pertaining to the hedgehog family ; of the nature of a hedgehog .
Very useful word . So , look at that .
Online dictionaries right now are paper thrown up on a screen .
This is flat . Look how many links there are in the actual entry : two !
Right ? Those little buttons , I had them all expanded except for the date chart .
So theres not very much going on here .
Theres not a lot of clickiness .
And in fact , online dictionaries replicate almost all the problems of print , except for searchability .
And when you improve searchability , you actually take away the one advantage of print , which is serendipity .
Serendipity is when you find things you werent looking for , because finding what you are looking for is so damned difficult .
So  -  -   -  -  now , when you think about this , what we have here is a ham butt problem .
Does everyone know the ham butt problem ?
Womans making a ham for a big , family dinner .
She goes to cut the butt off the ham and throw it away , and she looks at this piece of ham and shes like ,  This is a perfectly good piece of ham . Why am I throwing this away ? 
She thought ,  Well , my mom always did this . 
So she calls up mom , and she says ,  Mom , whyd you cut the butt off the ham , when youre making a ham ? 
She says ,  I dont know , my mom always did it ! 
So they call grandma , and grandma says ,  My pan was too small ! 
So , its not that we have good words and bad words .
We have a pan thats too small !
You know , that ham butt is delicious ! Theres no reason to throw it away .
The bad words  -  -  see , when people think about a place and they dont find a place on the map , they think ,  This map sucks ! 
When they find a nightspot or a bar , and its not in the guidebook , theyre like ,  Ooh , this place must be cool ! Its not in the guidebook . 
When they find a word thats not in the dictionary , they think ,  This must be a bad word .  Why ? Its more likely to be a bad dictionary .
Why are you blaming the ham for being too big for the pan ?
So , you cant get a smaller ham .
The English language is as big as it is .
So , if you have a ham butt problem , and youre thinking about the ham butt problem , the conclusion that it leads you to is inexorable and counterintuitive : paper is the enemy of words .
How can this be ? I mean , I love books . I really love books .
Some of my best friends are books .
But the book is not the best shape for the dictionary .
Now theyre going to think  Oh , boy .
People are going to take away my beautiful , paper dictionaries ? 
No . There will still be paper dictionaries .
When we had cars  -  -  when cars became the dominant mode of transportation , we didnt round up all the horses and shoot them .
You know , therere still going to be paper dictionaries , but its not going to be the dominant dictionary .
The book - shaped dictionary is not going to be the only shape dictionaries come in . And its not going to be the prototype for the shapes dictionaries come in .
So , think about it this way : if youve got an artificial constraint , artificial constraints lead to arbitrary distinctions and a skewed worldview .
What if biologists could only study animals that made people go ,  Aww .  Right ?
What if we made aesthetic judgments about animals , and only the ones we thought were cute were the ones that we could study ?
Wed know a whole lot about charismatic megafauna , and not very much about much else .
And I think this is a problem .
I think we should study all the words , because when you think about words , you can make beautiful expressions from very humble parts .
Lexicography is really more about material science .
We are studying the tolerances of the materials that you use to build the structure of your expression : your speeches and your writing . And then , often people say to me ,  Well , OK , how do I know that this word is real ? 
They think ,  OK , if we think words are the tools that we use to build the expressions of our thoughts , how can you say that screwdrivers are better than hammers ?
How can you say that a sledgehammer is better than a ball - peen hammer ? 
Theyre just the right tools for the job .
And so people say to me ,  How do I know if a word is real ? 
You know , anybody whos read a childrens book knows that love makes things real .
If you love a word , use it . That makes it real .
Being in the dictionary is an artificial distinction .
It doesnt make a word any more real than any other way .
If you love a word , it becomes real .
So if were not worrying about directing traffic , if weve transcended paper , if we are worrying less about control and more about description , then we can think of the English language as being this beautiful mobile .
And any time one of those little parts of the mobile changes , is touched , any time you touch a word , you use it in a new context , you give it a new connotation , you verb it , you make the mobile move .
You didnt break it . Its just in a new position , and that new position can be just as beautiful .
Now , if youre no longer a traffic cop  -  -  the problem with being a traffic cop is there can only be so many traffic cops in any one intersection , or the cars get confused . Right ?
But if your goal is no longer to direct the traffic , but maybe to count the cars that go by , then more eyeballs are better .
You can ask for help !
If you ask for help , you get more done . And we really need help .
Library of Congress : 17 million books , of which half are in English .
If only one out of every 10 of those books had a word thats not in the dictionary in it , that would be equivalent to more than two unabridged dictionaries .
And I find an un - dictionaried word  -  -  a word like  un - dictionaried ,  for example  -  -  in almost every book I read . What about newspapers ?
Newspaper archive goes back to 1759 , 58.1 million newspaper pages . If only one in 100 of those pages had an un - dictionaried word on it , it would be an entire other OED .
Thats 500,000 more words . So thats a lot .
And Im not even talking about magazines . Im not talking about blogs  -  -  and I find more new words on BoingBoing in a given week than I do Newsweek or Time .
Theres a lot going on there .
And Im not even talking about polysemy , which is the greedy habit some words have of taking more than one meaning for themselves .
So if you think of the word  set ,  a set can be a badgers burrow , a set can be one of the pleats in an Elizabethan ruff , and theres one numbered definition in the OED .
The OED has 33 different numbered definitions for set .
Tiny , little word , 33 numbered definitions .
One of them is just labeled  miscellaneous technical senses . 
Do you know what that says to me ?
That says to me , it was Friday afternoon and somebody wanted to go down the pub .
Thats a lexicographical cop out , to say ,  miscellaneous technical senses . 
So , we have all these words , and we really need help !
And the thing is , we could ask for help  -  -  asking for helps not that hard .
I mean , lexicography is not rocket science .
See , I just gave you a lot of words and a lot of numbers , and this is more of a visual explanation .
If we think of the dictionary as being the map of the English language , these bright spots are what we know about , and the dark spots are where we are in the dark .
If that was the map of all the words in American English , we dont know very much .
And we dont even know the shape of the language .
If this was the dictionary  -  -  if this was the map of American English  -  -  look , we have a kind of lumpy idea of Florida , but theres no California !
Were missing California from American English .
We just dont know enough , and we dont even know that were missing California .
We dont even see that theres a gap on the map .
So again , lexicography is not rocket science .
But even if it were , rocket science is being done by dedicated amateurs these days . You know ?
It cant be that hard to find some words !
So , enough scientists in other disciplines are really asking people to help , and theyre doing a good job of it .
For instance , theres eBird , where amateur birdwatchers can upload information about their bird sightings .
And then , ornithologists can go and help track populations , migrations , etc .
And theres this guy , Mike Oates . Mike Oates lives in the U.K .
Hes a director of an electroplating company .
Hes found more than 140 comets .
Hes found so many comets , they named a comet after him .
Its kind of out past Mars . Its a hike .
I dont think hes getting his picture taken there anytime soon .
But he found 140 comets without a telescope .
He downloaded data from the NASA SOHO satellite , and thats how he found them .
If we can find comets without a telescope , shouldnt we be able to find words ?
Now , yall know where Im going with this .
Because Im going to the Internet , which is where everybody goes .
And the Internet is great for collecting words , because the Internets full of collectors .
And this is a little - known technological fact about the Internet , but the Internet is actually made up of words and enthusiasm .
And words and enthusiasm actually happen to be the recipe for lexicography . Isnt that great ?
So there are a lot of really good word - collecting sites out there right now , but the problem with some of them is that theyre not scientific enough .
They show the word , but they dont show any context .
Where did it come from ? Who said it ?
What newspaper was it in ? What book ?
Because a word is like an archaeological artifact .
If you dont know the provenance or the source of the artifact , its not science , its a pretty thing to look at .
So a word without its source is like a cut flower .
You know , its pretty to look at for a while , but then it dies .
It dies too fast .
So , this whole time Ive been saying ,  The dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary , the dictionary . 
Not  a dictionary ,  or  dictionaries .  And thats because , well , people use the dictionary to stand for the whole language .
They use it synecdochically .
And one of the problems of knowing a word like  synecdochically  is that you really want an excuse to say  synecdochically . 
This whole talk has just been an excuse to get me to the point where I could say  synecdochically  to all of you .
So Im really sorry . But when you use a part of something  -  -  like the dictionary is a part of the language , or a flag stands for the United States , its a symbol of the country  -  -  then youre using it synecdochically .
But the thing is , we could make the dictionary the whole language .
If we get a bigger pan , then we can put all the words in .
We can put in all the meanings .
Doesnt everyone want more meaning in their lives ?
And we can make the dictionary not just be a symbol of the language  -  -  we can make it be the whole language .
You see , what Im really hoping for is that my son , who turns seven this month  -  -  I want him to barely remember that this is the form factor that dictionaries used to come in .
This is what dictionaries used to look like .
I want him to think of this kind of dictionary as an eight - track tape .
Its a format that died because it wasnt useful enough .
It wasnt really what people needed .
And the thing is , if we can put in all the words , no longer have that artificial distinction between good and bad , we can really describe the language like scientists .
We can leave the aesthetic judgments to the writers and the speakers .
If we can do that , then I can spend all my time fishing , and I dont have to be a traffic cop anymore .
Thank you very much for your kind attention .
Angela Belcher : Using nature to grow batteries
Inspired by an abalone shell , Angela Belcher programs viruses to make elegant nanoscale structures that humans can use . Selecting for high - performing genes through directed evolution , shes produced viruses that can construct powerful new batteries , clean hydrogen fuels and record - breaking solar cells . In her talk , she shows us how its done .
I thought I would talk a little bit about how nature makes materials .
I brought along with me an abalone shell .
This abalone shell is a biocomposite material thats 98 percent by mass calcium carbonate and two percent by mass protein .
Yet , its 3,000 times tougher than its geological counterpart .
And a lot of people might use structures like abalone shells , like chalk .
Ive been fascinated by how nature makes materials , and theres a lot of sequence to how they do such an exquisite job .
Part of it is that these materials are macroscopic in structure , but theyre formed at the nanoscale .
Theyre formed at the nanoscale , and they use proteins that are coded by the genetic level that allow them to build these really exquisite structures .
So something I think is very fascinating is what if you could give life to non - living structures , like batteries and like solar cells ?
What if they had some of the same capabilities that an abalone shell did , in terms of being able to build really exquisite structures at room temperature and room pressure , using non - toxic chemicals and adding no toxic materials back into the environment ?
So thats the vision that Ive been thinking about .
And so what if you could grow a battery in a Petri dish ?
Or , what if you could give genetic information to a battery so that it could actually become better as a function of time , and do so in an environmentally friendly way ?
And so , going back to this abalone shell , besides being nano - structured , one thing thats fascinating , is when a male and a female abalone get together , they pass on the genetic information that says ,  This is how to build an exquisite material .
Heres how to do it at room temperature and pressure , using non - toxic materials . 
Same with diatoms , which are shown right here , which are glasseous structures .
Every time the diatoms replicate , they give the genetic information that says ,  Heres how to build glass in the ocean thats perfectly nano - structured .
And you can do it the same , over and over again . 
So what if you could do the same thing with a solar cell or a battery ?
I like to say my favorite biomaterial is my four year - old .
But anyone whos ever had , or knows , small children knows theyre incredibly complex organisms .
And so if you wanted to convince them to do something they dont want to do , its very difficult .
So when we think about future technologies , we actually think of using bacteria and virus , simple organisms .
Can you convince them to work with a new toolbox , so that they can build a structure that will be important to me ?
Also , when we think about future technologies , we start with the beginning of Earth .
Basically , it took a billion years to have life on Earth .
And very rapidly , they became multi - cellular , they could replicate , they could use photosynthesis as a way of getting their energy source .
But it wasnt until about 500 million years ago  -  -  during the Cambrian geologic time period  -  -  that organisms in the ocean started making hard materials .
Before that , they were all soft , fluffy structures .
And it was during this time that there was increased calcium and iron and silicon in the environment , and organisms learned how to make hard materials .
And so thats what I would like be able to do  -  -  convince biology to work with the rest of the periodic table .
Now if you look at biology , theres many structures like DNA and antibodies and proteins and ribosomes that youve heard about that are already nano - structured .
So nature already gives us really exquisite structures on the nanoscale .
What if we could harness them and convince them to not be an antibody that does something like HIV ?
But what if we could convince them to build a solar cell for us ?
So here are some examples : these are some natural shells .
There are natural biological materials .
The abalone shell here  -  -  and if you fracture it , you can look at the fact that its nano - structured .
Theres diatoms made out of SIO2 , and theyre magnetotactic bacteria that make small , single - domain magnets used for navigation .
What all these have in common is these materials are structured at the nanoscale , and they have a DNA sequence that codes for a protein sequence that gives them the blueprint to be able to build these really wonderful structures .
Now , going back to the abalone shell , the abalone makes this shell by having these proteins .
These proteins are very negatively charged .
And they can pull calcium out of the environment , put down a layer of calcium and then carbonate , calcium and carbonate .
It has the chemical sequences of amino acids , which says ,  This is how to build the structure .
Heres the DNA sequence , heres the protein sequence in order to do it . 
And so an interesting idea is , what if you could take any material that you wanted , or any element on the periodic table , and find its corresponding DNA sequence , then code it for a corresponding protein sequence to build a structure , but not build an abalone shell  -  -  build something that , through nature , it has never had the opportunity to work with yet .
And so heres the periodic table .
And I absolutely love the periodic table .
Every year for the incoming freshman class at MIT , I have a periodic table made that says ,  Welcome to MIT . Now youre in your element . 
And you flip it over , and its the amino acids with the PH at which they have different charges .
And so I give this out to thousands of people .
And I know it says MIT , and this is Caltech , but I have a couple extra if people want it .
And I was really fortunate to have President Obama visit my lab this year on his visit to MIT , and I really wanted to give him a periodic table .
So I stayed up at night , and I talked to my husband ,  How do I give President Obama a periodic table ?
What if he says , Oh , I already have one , or , Ive already memorized it ? 
And so he came to visit my lab and looked around  -  -  it was a great visit .
And then afterward , I said ,  Sir , I want to give you the periodic table in case youre ever in a bind and need to calculate molecular weight . 
And I thought molecular weight sounded much less nerdy than molar mass .
And so he looked at it , and he said ,  Thank you . Ill look at it periodically . 
And later in a lecture that he gave on clean energy , he pulled it out and said ,  And people at MIT , they give out periodic tables . 
So basically what I didnt tell you is that about 500 million years ago , organisms starter making materials , but it took them about 50 million years to get good at it .
It took them about 50 million years to learn how to perfect how to make that abalone shell .
And thats a hard sell to a graduate student .
 I have this great project  -  -  50 million years . 
And so we had to develop a way of trying to do this more rapidly .
And so we use a virus thats a non - toxic virus called M13 bacteriophage thats job is to infect bacteria .
Well it has a simple DNA structure that you can go in and cut and paste additional DNA sequences into it .
And by doing that , it allows the virus to express random protein sequences .
And this is pretty easy biotechnology .
And you could basically do this a billion times .
And so you can go in and have a billion different viruses that are all genetically identical , but they differ from each other based on their tips , on one sequence that codes for one protein .
Now if you take all billion viruses , and you can put them in one drop of liquid , you can force them to interact with anything you want on the periodic table .
And through a process of selection evolution , you can pull one out of a billion that does something that youd like it to do , like grow a battery or grow a solar cell .
So basically , viruses cant replicate themselves ; they need a host .
Once you find that one out of a billion , you infect it into a bacteria , and you make millions and billions of copies of that particular sequence .
And so the other thing thats beautiful about biology is that biology gives you really exquisite structures with nice link scales .
And these viruses are long and skinny , and we can get them to express the ability to grow something like semiconductors or materials for batteries .
Now this is a high - powered battery that we grew in my lab .
We engineered a virus to pick up carbon nanotubes .
So one part of the virus grabs a carbon nanotube .
The other part of the virus has a sequence that can grow an electrode material for a battery .
And then it wires itself to the current collector .
And so through a process of selection evolution , we went from being able to have a virus that made a crummy battery to a virus that made a good battery to a virus that made a record - breaking , high - powered battery thats all made at room temperature , basically at the bench top .
And that battery went to the White House for a press conference .
I brought it here .
You can see it in this case  -  -  thats lighting this LED .
Now if we could scale this , you could actually use it to run your Prius , which is my dream  -  -  to be able to drive a virus - powered car .
But its basically  -  -  you can pull one out of a billion .
You can make lots of amplifications to it .
Basically , you make an amplification in the lab , and then you get it to self - assemble into a structure like a battery .
Were able to do this also with catalysis .
This is the example of photocatalytic splitting of water .
And what weve been able to do is engineer a virus to basically take dye - absorbing molecules and line them up on the surface of the virus so it acts as an antenna , and you get an energy transfer across the virus .
And then we give it a second gene to grow an inorganic material that can be used to split water into oxygen and hydrogen that can be used for clean fuels .
And I brought an example with me of that today .
My students promised me it would work .
These are virus - assembled nanowires .
When you shine light on them , you can see them bubbling .
In this case , youre seeing oxygen bubbles come out .
And basically , by controlling the genes , you can control multiple materials to improve your device performance .
The last example are solar cells .
You can also do this with solar cells .
Weve been able to engineer viruses to pick up carbon nanotubes and then grow titanium dioxide around them  -  -  and use as a way of getting electrons through the device .
And what weve found is through genetic engineering , we can actually increase the efficiencies of these solar cells to record numbers for these types of dye - sensitized systems .
And I brought one of those as well that you can play around with outside afterward .
So this is a virus - based solar cell .
Through evolution and selection , we took it from an eight percent efficiency solar cell to an 11 percent efficiency solar cell .
So I hope that Ive convinced you that theres a lot of great , interesting things to be learned about how nature makes materials  -  -  and taking it the next step to see if you can force , or whether you can take advantage of how nature makes materials , to make things that nature hasnt yet dreamed of making .
Thank you .
Stefan Sagmeister : Happiness by design
Graphic designer Stefan Sagmeister takes the audience on a whimsical journey through moments of his life that made him happy  -  -  and notes how many of these moments have to do with good design .
About 15 years ago , I went to visit a friend in Hong Kong .
And at the time I was very superstitious .
So , upon landing  -  -  this was still at the old Hong Kong airport thats Kai Tak , when it was smack in the middle of the city  -  -  I thought ,  If I see something good , Im going to have a great time here in my two weeks . And if I see something negative , Im going to be miserable , indeed . 
So the plane landed in between the buildings and got to a full stop in front of this little billboard .
And I actually went to see some of the design companies in Hong Kong in my stay there .
And it turned out that  -  -  I just went to see , you know , what they are doing in Hong Kong .
But I actually walked away with a great job offer .
And I flew back to Austria , packed my bags , and , another week later , I was again on my way to Hong Kong still superstitions and thinking ,  Well , if that Winner billboard is still up , Im going to have a good time working here .
But if its gone , its going to be really miserable and stressful . 
So it turned out that not only was the billboard still up but they had put this one right next to it .
On the other hand , it also taught me where superstition gets me because I really had a terrible time in Hong Kong .
However , I did have a number of real moments of happiness in my life  -  -  of , you know , I think what the conference brochure refers to as  moments that take your breath away . 
And since Im a big list maker , I actually listed them all .
Now , you dont have to go through the trouble of reading them and I wont read them for you .
I know that its incredibly boring to hear about other peoples happinesses .
What I did do , though is , I actually looked at them from a design standpoint and just eliminated all the ones that had nothing to do with design .
And , very surprisingly , over half of them had , actually , something to do with design .
So there are , of course , two different possibilities .
Theres one from a consumers point of view  -  -  where I was happy while experiencing design .
And Ill just give you one example . I had gotten my first Walkman .
This is 1983 .
My brother had this great Yamaha motorcycle that he was willing to borrow to me freely .
And The Polices  Synchronicity  cassette had just been released and there was no helmet law in my hometown of Bregenz .
So you could drive up into the mountains freely blasting The Police on the new Sony Walkman .
And I remember it as a true moment of happiness .
You know , of course , they are related to this combination of at least two of them being , you know , design objects .
And , you know , theres a scale of happiness when you talk about in design but the motorcycle incident would definitely be , you know , situated somewhere here  -  -  right in there between Delight and Bliss .
Now , there is the other part , from a designers standpoint  -  -  if youre happy while actually doing it .
And one way to see how happy designers are when theyre designing could be to look at the authors photos on the back of their monographs ?
So , according to this , the Australians and the Japanese as well as the Mexicans are very happy .
While , somewhat , the Spaniards ...
and , I think , particularly , the Swiss , dont seem to be doing all that well .
Last November , a museum opened in Tokyo called The Mori Museum , in a skyscraper , up on the 56th floor .
And their inaugural exhibit was called  Happiness . 
And I went , very eagerly , to see it , because  -  -  well , also , with an eye on this conference .
And they interestingly sectioned the exhibit off into four different areas .
Under  Arcadia ,  they showed things like this , from the Edo period  -  -  a hundred ways to write  happiness  in different forms .
Or they had this apple by Yoko Ono  -  -  that , of course , later on was , you know , made into the label for The Beatles .
Under  Nirvana  they showed this Constable painting .
And there was a little  -  -  an interesting theory about abstraction .
This is a blue field  -  -  its actually an Yves Klein painting .
And the theory was that if you abstract an image , you really , you know open as much room for the un - representable  -  -  and , therefore , you know , are able to involve the viewer more .
Then , under  Desire ,  they showed these Shunsho paintings  -  -  also from the Edo period  -  -  ink on silk .
And , lastly , under  Harmony ,  they had this 13th - century mandala from Tibet .
Now , what I took away from the exhibit was that maybe with the exception of the mandala most of the pieces in there were actually about the visualization of happiness and not about happiness .
And I felt a little bit cheated , because the visualization  -  -  thats a really easy thing to do .
And , you know , my studio  -  -  weve done it all the time .
This is , you know , a book .
A happy dog  -  -  and you take it out , its an aggressive dog .
Its a happy David Byrne and an angry David Byrne .
Or a jazz poster with a happy face and a more aggressive face .
You know , thats not a big deal to accomplish .
It has gotten to the point where , you know , within advertising or within the movie industry ,  happy  has gotten such a bad reputation that if you actually want to do something with the subject and still appear authentic , you almost would have to , you know , do it from a cynical point of view .
This is , you know , the movie poster .
Or we , a couple of weeks ago , designed a box set for The Talking Heads where the happiness visualized on the cover definitely has , very much , a dark side to it .
Much , much more difficult is this , where the designs actually can evoke happiness  -  -  and Im going to just show you three that actually did this for me .
This is a campaign done by a young artist in New York , who calls himself  True . 
Everybody who has ridden the New York subway system will be familiar with these signs ?
True printed his own version of these signs .
Met every Wednesday at a subway stop with 20 of his friends .
They divided up the different subway lines and added their own version .
So this is one .
Now , the way this works in the system is that nobody ever looks at these signs .
So youre youre really bored in the subway , and you kind of stare at something .
And it takes you a while until it actually  -  -  you realize that this says something different than what it normally says .
I mean , thats , at least , how it made me happy .
Now , True is a real humanitarian .
He didnt want any of his friends to be arrested , so he supplied everybody with this fake volunteer card .
And also gave this fake letter from the MTA to everybody  -  -  sort of like pretending that its an art project financed by The Metropolitan Transit Authority .
Another New York project .
This is at P.S. 1  -  -  a sculpture thats basically a square room by James Turrell , that has a retractable ceiling .
Opens up at dusk and dawn every day .
You dont see the horizon .
Youre just in there , watching the incredible , subtle changes of color in the sky .
And the room is truly something to be seen .
Peoples demeanor changes when they go in there .
And , for sure , I havent looked at the sky in the same way after spending an hour in there .
There are , of course , more than those three projects that Im showing here .
I would definitely say that observing Vik Muniz  Cloud  a couple of years ago in Manhattan for sure made me happy , as well .
But my last project is , again , from a young designer in New York .
Hes from Korea originally .
And he took it upon himself to print 55,000 speech bubbles  -  -  empty speech bubbles stickers , large ones and small ones .
And he goes around New York and just puts them , empty as they are , on posters .
And other people go and fill them in .
This one says ,  Please let me die in peace . 
I think that was  -  -  the most surprising to myself was that the writing was actually so good .
This is on a musician poster , that says :  I am concerned that my CD will not sell more than 200,000 units and that , as a result , my recoupable advance from my label will be taken from me , after which , my contract will be cancelled , and Ill be back doing Journey covers on Bleecker Street . 
I think the reason this works so well is because everybody involved wins .
Jee gets to have his project ; the public gets a sweeter environment ; and different public gets a place to express itself ; and the advertisers finally get somebody to look at their ads .
Well , there was a question , of course , that was on my mind for a while : You know , can I do more of the things that I like doing in design and less of the ones that I dont like to be doing ?
Which brought me back to my list making  -  -  you know , just to see what I actually like about my job .
You know , one is : just working without pressure .
Then : working concentrated , without being frazzled .
Or , as Nancy said before , like really immerse oneself into it .
Try not to get stuck doing the same thing  -  -  or try not get stuck behind the computer all day .
This is , you know , related to it : getting out of the studio .
Then , of course , trying to , you know , work on things where the content is actually important for me .
And being able to enjoy the end results .
And then I found another list in one of my diaries that actually contained all the things that I thought I learned in my life so far .
And , just about at that time , an Austrian magazine called and asked if we would want to do six spreads  -  -  design six spreads that work like dividing pages between the different chapters in the magazine ?
And the whole thing just fell together .
So I just picked one of the things that I thought I learned  -  -  in this case ,  Everything I do always comes back to me   -  -  and we made these spreads right out of this .
So it was :  Everything I do always comes back to me . 
A couple of weeks ago , a French company asked us to design five billboards for them .
Again , we could supply the content for it .
So I just picked another one .
And this was two weeks ago .
We flew to Arizona  -  -  the designer who works with me , and myself  -  -  and photographed this one .
So its :  Trying to look good limits my life . 
And then we did one more of these .
This is , again , for a magazine , dividing pages .
This is :  Having   -  -  this is the same thing ; its just , you know , photographed from the side .
This is from the front .
Again , its the same thing  -  -   guts  is just the same room , reworked .
Then its :  always works out . 
Then its  for ,  with the light on .
And its  me . 
Thank you so much .
Stephen Hawkings zero g flight
X Prize founder Peter Diamandis talks about how he helped Stephen Hawking fulfill his dream of going to space  -  -  by flying together into the upper atmosphere and experiencing weightlessness at zero g .
Those of you who know me know how passionate I am about opening the space frontier .
So when I had the chance to give the worlds expert in gravity the experience of zero gravity , it was incredible .
And I want to tell you that story .
I first met him through the Archon X PRIZE for Genomics .
Its a competition were holding , the second X PRIZE , for the first team to sequence 100 human genomes in 10 days .
We have something called the Genome 100  -  -  100 individuals were sequencing as part of that .
Craig Venter chairs that event .
And I met Professor Hawking , and he said his dream was to travel into space .
And I said ,  I cant take you there , but I can take you into weightlessness into zero - g .
And he said , on the spot ,  Absolutely , yes . 
Well , the only way to experience zero - g on Earth is actually with parabolic flight , weightless flight .
You take an airplane , you fly over the top , youre weightless for 25 seconds .
Come back down , you weigh twice as much .
You do it again and again .
You can get eight , 10 minutes of weightlessness  -  -  how NASAs trained their astronauts for so long .
We set out to do this .
It took us 11 years to become operational .
And we announced that we were going to fly Stephen Hawking .
We had one government agency and one company aircraft operator say , youre crazy , dont do that , youre going kill the guy .
And he wanted to go .
We worked hard to get all the permissions .
And six months later , we sat down at Kennedy Space Center .
We had a press conference , we announced our intent to do one zero - g parabola , give him 25 seconds of zero - g .
And if it went really well , we might do three parabolas .
Well , we asked him why he wanted to go up and do this .
And what he said , for me , was very moving .
He said ,  Life on Earth is at an ever - increasing risk of being wiped out by disaster ...
I think the human race doesnt have a future if it doesnt go into space .
I therefore want to encourage public interest in space . 
We took him out to the Kennedy Space Center , up inside the NASA vehicle , into the back of the zero - g airplane .
We had about 20 people who made donations  -  -  we raised $ 150,000 in donations for childrens charities  -  -  who flew with us .
A few TEDsters here .
We set up a whole ER .
We had four emergency room doctors and two nurses on board the airplane .
We were monitoring his PO2 of his blood , his heart rate , his blood pressure .
We had everything all set in case of an emergency ; God knows , you dont want to hurt this world - renowned expert .
We took off from the shuttle landing facility , where the shuttle takes off and lands .
And my partner Byron Lichtenberg and I carefully suspended him into zero - g .
Once he was there ,  we  let him go to experience what weightlessness was truly like .
And after that first parabola , you know , the doc said everything is great . He was smiling , and we said go .
So we did a second parabola .
And a third .
We actually floated an apple in homage to Sir Isaac Newton because Professor Hawking holds the same chair at Cambridge that Isaac Newton did .
And we did a fourth , and a fifth and a sixth .
And a seventh and an eighth .
And this man does not look like a 65 - year - old wheelchair - bound man .
He was so happy .
We are living on a precious jewel , and its during our lifetime that were moving off this planet .
Please join us in this epic adventure .
Thank you so much .
Matt Killingsworth : Want to be happier ? Stay in the moment
When are humans most happy ? To gather data on this question , Matt Killingsworth built an app , Track Your Happiness , that let people report their feelings in real time . Among the surprising results : Were often happiest when were lost in the moment . And the flip side : The more our mind wanders , the less happy we can be .
So , people want a lot of things out of life , but I think , more than anything else , they want happiness .
Aristotle called happiness  the chief good ,  the end towards which all other things aim .
According to this view , the reason we want a big house or a nice car or a good job isnt that these things are intrinsically valuable .
Its that we expect them to bring us happiness .
Now in the last 50 years , we Americans have gotten a lot of the things that we want . Were richer .
We live longer . We have access to technology that would have seemed like science fiction just a few years ago .
The paradox of happiness is that even though the objective conditions of our lives have improved dramatically , we havent actually gotten any happier .
Maybe because these conventional notions of progress havent delivered big benefits in terms of happiness , theres been an increased interest in recent years in happiness itself .
People have been debating the causes of happiness for a really long time , in fact for thousands of years , but it seems like many of those debates remain unresolved .
Well , as with many other domains in life , I think the scientific method has the potential to answer this question .
In fact , in the last few years , theres been an explosion in research on happiness . For example , weve learned a lot about its demographics , how things like income and education , gender and marriage relate to it .
But one of the puzzles this has revealed is that factors like these dont seem to have a particularly strong effect .
Yes , its better to make more money rather than less , or to graduate from college instead of dropping out , but the differences in happiness tend to be small .
Which leaves the question , what are the big causes of happiness ?
I think thats a question we havent really answered yet , but I think something that has the potential to be an answer is that maybe happiness has an awful lot to do with the contents of our moment - to - moment experiences .
It certainly seems that were going about our lives , that what were doing , who were with , what were thinking about , have a big influence on our happiness , and yet these are the very factors that have been very difficult , in fact almost impossible , for scientists to study .
A few years ago , I came up with a way to study peoples happiness moment to moment as theyre going about their daily lives on a massive scale all over the world , something wed never been able to do before . Called trackyourhappiness . org , it uses the IPhoneto monitor peoples happiness in real time .
How does this work ? Basically , I send people signals at random points throughout the day , and then I ask them a bunch of questions about their moment - to - moment experience at the instant just before the signal .
The idea is that , if we can watch how peoples happiness goes up and down over the course of the day , minute to minute in some cases , and try to understand how what people are doing , who theyre with , what theyre thinking about , and all the other factors that describe our day , how those might relate to those changes in happiness , we might be able to discover some of the things that really have a big influence on happiness .
Weve been fortunate with this project to collect quite a lot of data , a lot more data of this kind than I think has ever been collected before , over 650,000 real - time reports from over 15,000 people .
And its not just a lot of people , its a really diverse group , people from a wide range of ages , from 18 to late 80s , a wide range of incomes , education levels , people who are married , divorced , widowed , etc .
They collectively represent every one of 86 occupational categories and hail from over 80 countries .
What Id like to do with the rest of my time with you today is talk a little bit about one of the areas that weve been investigating , and thats mind - wandering .
As human beings , we have this unique ability to have our minds stray away from the present .
This guy is sitting here working on his computer , and yet he could be thinking about the vacation he had last month , wondering what hes going to have for dinner .
Maybe hes worried that hes going bald .
This ability to focus our attention on something other than the present is really amazing . It allows us to learn and plan and reason in ways that no other species of animal can .
And yet its not clear what the relationship is between our use of this ability and our happiness .
Youve probably heard people suggest that you should stay focused on the present .  Be here now ,  youve probably heard a hundred times .
Maybe , to really be happy , we need to stay completely immersed and focused on our experience in the moment .
Maybe these people are right . Maybe mind - wandering is a bad thing .
On the other hand , when our minds wander , theyre unconstrained . We cant change the physical reality in front of us , but we can go anywhere in our minds .
Since we know people want to be happy , maybe when our minds wander , theyre going to someplace happier than the place that theyre leaving . It would make a lot of sense .
In other words , maybe the pleasures of the mind allow us to increase our happiness with mind - wandering .
Well , since Im a scientist , Id like to try to resolve this debate with some data , and in particular Id like to present some data to you from three questions that I ask with Track Your Happiness . Remember , this is from sort of moment - to - moment experience in peoples real lives .
There are three questions . The first one is a happiness question : How do you feel , on a scale ranging from very bad to very good ? Second , an activity question : What are you doing , on a list of 22 different activities including things like eating and working and watching TV ?
And finally a mind - wandering question : Are you thinking about something other than what youre currently doing ?
People could say no  -  -  in other words , Im focused only on my task  -  -  or yes  -  -  I am thinking about something else  -  -  and the topic of those thoughts are pleasant , neutral or unpleasant .
Any of those yes responses are what we called mind - wandering .
So what did we find ?
This graph shows happiness on the vertical axis , and you can see that bar there representing how happy people are when theyre focused on the present , when theyre not mind - wandering .
As it turns out , people are substantially less happy when their minds are wandering than when theyre not .
Now you might look at this result and say , okay , sure , on average people are less happy when theyre mind - wandering , but surely when their minds are straying away from something that wasnt very enjoyable to begin with , at least then mind - wandering should be doing something good for us .
Nope . As it turns out , people are less happy when theyre mind - wandering no matter what theyre doing . For example , people dont really like commuting to work very much .
Its one of their least enjoyable activities , and yet they are substantially happier when theyre focused only on their commute than when their mind is going off to something else .
Its amazing .
So how could this be happening ? I think part of the reason , a big part of the reason , is that when our minds wander , we often think about unpleasant things , and they are enormously less happy when they do that , our worries , our anxieties , our regrets , and yet even when people are thinking about something neutral , theyre still considerably less happy than when theyre not mind - wandering at all .
Even when theyre thinking about something they would describe as pleasant , theyre actually just slightly less happy than when they arent mind - wandering .
If mind - wandering were a slot machine , it would be like having the chance to lose 50 dollars , 20 dollars or one dollar . Right ? Youd never want to play .
So Ive been talking about this , suggesting , perhaps , that mind - wandering causes unhappiness , but all Ive really shown you is that these two things are correlated .
Its possible thats the case , but it might also be the case that when people are unhappy , then they mind - wander .
Maybe thats whats really going on . How could we ever disentangle these two possibilites ?
Well , one fact that we can take advantage of , I think a fact youll all agree is true , is that time goes forward , not backward . Right ? The cause has to come before the effect .
Were lucky in this data we have many responses from each person , and so we can look and see , does mind - wandering tend to precede unhappiness , or does unhappiness tend to precede mind - wandering , to get some insight into the causal direction .
As it turns out , there is a strong relationship between mind - wandering now and being unhappy a short time later , consistent with the idea that mind - wandering is causing people to be unhappy .
In contrast , theres no relationship between being unhappy now and mind - wandering a short time later .
In other words , mind - wandering very likely seems to be an actual cause , and not merely a consequence , of unhappiness .
A few minutes ago , I likened mind - wandering to a slot machine youd never want to play .
Well , how often do peoples minds wander ?
Turns out , they wander a lot . In fact , really a lot .
Forty - seven percent of the time , people are thinking about something other than what theyre currently doing .
How does that depend on what people are doing ?
This shows the rate of mind - wandering across 22 activities ranging from a high of 65 percent — — when people are taking a shower , brushing their teeth , to 50 percent when theyre working , to 40 percent when theyre exercising , all the way down to this one short bar on the right that I think some of you are probably laughing at .
Ten percent of the time peoples minds are wandering when theyre having sex .
But theres something I think thats quite interesting in this graph , and that is , basically with one exception , no matter what people are doing , theyre mind - wandering at least 30 percent of the time , which suggests , I think , that mind - wandering isnt just frequent , its ubiquitous .
It pervades basically everything that we do .
In my talk today , Ive told you a little bit about mind - wandering , a variable that I think turns out to be fairly important in the equation for happiness .
My hope is that over time , by tracking peoples moment - to - moment happiness and their experiences in daily life , well be able to uncover a lot of important causes of happiness , and then in the end , a scientific understanding of happiness will help us create a future thats not only richer and healthier , but happier as well .
Thank you .
Eli Beer : The fastest ambulance ? A motorcycle
As a young EMT on a Jerusalem ambulance , Eli Beer realized that , stuck in brutal urban traffic , they often arrived too late to help . So he organized a group of volunteer EMTs  -  -  many on foot  -  -  ready to drop everything and dash to save lives in their neighborhood . Today , United Hatzlah uses a smartphone app and a fleet of  ambucycles  to help nearby patients until an ambulance arrives . With an average response time of 3 minutes , last year , they treated 207,000 people in Israel . And the idea is going global .
This is an ambucycle .
This is the fastest way to reach any medical emergency .
It has everything an ambulance has except for a bed .
You see the defibrillator . You see the equipment .
We all saw the tragedy that happened in Boston .
When I was looking at these pictures , it brought me back many years to my past when I was a child .
I grew up in a small neighborhood in Jerusalem .
When I was six years old , I was walking back from school on a Friday afternoon with my older brother .
We were passing by a bus stop .
We saw a bus blow up in front of our eyes .
The bus was on fire , and many people were hurt and killed .
I remembered an old man yelling to us and crying to help us get him up .
He just needed someone helping him .
We were so scared and we just ran away .
Growing up , I decided I wanted to become a doctor and save lives .
Maybe that was because of what I saw when I was a child .
When I was 15 , I took an EMT course , and I went to volunteer on an ambulance .
For two years , I volunteered on an ambulance in Jerusalem .
I helped many people , but whenever someone really needed help , I never got there in time . We never got there .
The traffic is so bad . The distance , and everything .
We never got there when somebody really needed us .
One day , we received a call about a seven - year - old child choking from a hot dog .
Traffic was horrific , and we were coming from the other side of town in the north part of Jerusalem .
When we got there , 20 minutes later , we started CPR on the kid .
A doctor comes in from a block away , stop us , checks the kid , and tells us to stop CPR .
That second he declared this child dead .
At that moment , I understood that this child died for nothing .
If this doctor , who lived one block away from there , would have come 20 minutes earlier , not have to wait until that siren he heard before coming from the ambulance , if he would have heard about it way before , he would have saved this child .
He could have run from a block away .
He could have saved this child .
I said to myself , there must be a better way .
Together with 15 of my friends  -  -  we were all EMTs — we decided , lets protect our neighborhood , so when something like that happens again , we will be there running to the scene a lot before the ambulance .
So I went over to the manager of the ambulance company and I told him ,  Please , whenever you have a call coming into our neighborhood , we have 15 great guys who are willing to stop everything theyre doing and run and save lives .
Just alert us by beeper .
Well buy these beepers , just tell your dispatch to send us the beeper , and we will run and save lives . 
Well , he was laughing . I was 17 years old . I was a kid .
And he said to me — I remember this like yesterday — he was a great guy , but he said to me ,  Kid , go to school , or go open a falafel stand .
Were not really interested in these kinds of new adventures .
Were not interested in your help .  And he threw me out of the room .
 I dont need your help ,  he said .
I was a very stubborn kid .
As you see now , Im walking around like crazy , meshugenah .
So I decided to use the Israeli very famous technique youve probably all heard of , chutzpah .
And the next day , I went and I bought two police scanners , and I said ,  The hell with you , if you dont want to give me information , Ill get the information myself . 
And we did turns , whos going to listen to the radio scanners .
The next day , while I was listening to the scanners , I heard about a call coming in of a 70 - year - old man hurt by a car only one block away from me on the main street of my neighborhood .
I ran there by foot . I had no medical equipment .
When I got there , the 70 - year - old man was lying on the floor , blood was gushing out of his neck .
He was on Coumadin .
I knew I had to stop his bleeding or else he would die .
I took off my yarmulke , because I had no medical equipment , and with a lot of pressure , I stopped his bleeding .
He was bleeding from his neck .
When the ambulance arrived 15 minutes later , I gave them over a patient who was alive .
When I went to visit him two days later , he gave me a hug and was crying and thanking me for saving his life .
At that moment , when I realized this is the first person I ever saved in my life after two years volunteering in an ambulance , I knew this is my lifes mission .
So today , 22 years later , we have United Hatzalah .
 Hatzalah  means  rescue ,  for all of you who dont know Hebrew .
I forgot Im not in Israel .
So we have thousands of volunteers who are passionate about saving lives , and theyre spread all around , so whenever a call comes in , they just stop everything and go and run and save a life .
Our average response time today went down to less than three minutes in Israel .
Im talking about heart attacks , Im talking about car accidents , God forbid bomb attacks , shootings , whatever it is , even a woman 3 oclock in the morning falling in her home and needs someone to help her .
Three minutes , well have a guy with his pajamas running to her house and helping her get up .
The reasons why were so successful are because of three things .
Thousands of passionate volunteers who will leave everything they do and run to help people they dont even know .
Were not there to replace ambulances .
Were just there to get the gap between the ambulance call until they arrive .
And we save people that otherwise would not be saved .
The second reason is because of our technology .
You know , Israelis are good in technology .
Every one of us has on his phone , no matter what kind of phone , a GPS technology done by NowForce , and whenever a call comes in , the closest five volunteers get the call , and they actually get there really quick , and navigated by a traffic navigator to get there and not waste time .
And this is a great technology we use all over the country and reduce the response time .
And the third thing are these ambucycles .
These ambucycles are an ambulance on two wheels .
We dont transfer people , but we stabilize them , and we save their lives .
They never get stuck in traffic . They could even go on a sidewalk .
They never , literally , get stuck in traffic .
Thats why we get there so fast .
A few years after I started this organization , in a Jewish community , two Muslims from east Jerusalem called me up .
They ask me to meet . They wanted to meet with me .
Muhammad Asli and Murad Alyan .
When Muhammad told me his personal story , how his father , 55 years old , collapsed at home , had a cardiac arrest , and it took over an hour for an ambulance arrive , and he saw his father die in front of his eyes , he asked me ,  Please start this in east Jerusalem . 
I said to myself , I saw so much tragedy , so much hate , and its not about saving Jews . Its not about saving Muslims .
Its not about saving Christians . Its about saving people .
So I went ahead , full force  -  -  — and I started United Hatzalah in east Jerusalem , and thats why the names United and Hatzalah match so well .
We started hand in hand saving Jews and Arabs .
Arabs were saving Jews . Jews were saving Arabs .
Something special happened .
Arabs and Jews , they dont always get along together , but here in this situation , the communities , literally , its an unbelievable situation that happened , the diversities , all of a sudden they had a common interest : Lets save lives together .
Settlers were saving Arabs and Arabs were saving settlers .
Its an unbelievable concept that could work only when you have such a great cause .
And these are all volunteers .
No one is getting money .
Theyre all doing it for the purpose of saving lives .
When my own father collapsed a few years ago from a cardiac arrest , one of the first volunteers to arrive to save my father was one of these Muslim volunteers from east Jerusalem who was in the first course to join Hatzalah .
And he saved my father .
Could you imagine how I felt in that moment ?
When I started this organization , I was 17 years old .
I never imagined that one day Id be speaking at TEDMED .
I never even knew what TEDMED was then .
I dont think it existed , but I never imagined , I never imagined that its going to go all around , its going to spread around , and this last year we started in Panama and Brazil .
All I need is a partner who is a little meshugenah like me , passionate about saving lives , and willing to do it .
And Im actually starting it in India very soon with a friend who I met in Harvard just a while back .
Hatzalah actually started in Brooklyn by a Hasidic Jew years before us in Williamsburg , and now its all over the Jewish community in New York , even Australia and Mexico and many other Jewish communities .
But it could spread everywhere .
Its very easy to adopt .
You even saw these volunteers in New York saving lives in the World Trade Center .
Last year alone , we treated in Israel 207,000 people .
Forty - two thousand of them were life - threatening situations .
And we made a difference .
I guess you could call this a lifesaving flash mob , and it works .
When I look all around here , I see lots of people who would go an extra mile , run an extra mile to save other people , no matter who they are , no matter what religion , no matter who , where they come from .
We all want to be heroes .
We just need a good idea , motivation and lots of chutzpah , and we could save millions of people that otherwise would not be saved .
Thank you very much .
Joshua Silver : Adjustable liquid - filled eyeglasses
Josh Silver delivers his brilliantly simple solution for correcting vision at the lowest cost possible  -  -  adjustable , liquid - filled lenses . At TEDGlobal 2009 , he demos his affordable eyeglasses and reveals his global plan to distribute them to a billion people in need by 2020 .
Im going to tell you about one of the worlds largest problems and how it can be solved .
Id like to start with a little experiment .
Could you put your hand up if you wear glasses or contact lenses , or youve had laser refractive surgery ?
Now , unfortunately , there are too many of you for me to do the statistics properly .
But it looks like  -  -  Im guessing  -  -  that itll be about 60 percent of the room because thats roughly the fraction of developed world population that have some sort of vision correction .
The World Health Organization estimates  -  -  well , they make various estimates of the number of people who need glasses  -  -  the lowest estimate is 150 million people .
They also have an estimate of around a billion .
But in fact , I would argue that weve just done an experiment here and now , which shows us that the global need for corrective eyewear is around half of any population .
And the problem of poor vision , is actually not just a health problem , its also an educational problem , and its an economic problem , and its a quality of life problem .
Glasses are not very expensive . Theyre quite plentiful .
The problem is , there arent enough eye care professionals in the world to use the model of the delivery of corrective eyewear that we have in the developed world .
There are just way too few eye care professionals .
So this little slide here shows you an optometrist and the little blue person represents about 10,000 people and thats the ratio in the U.K .
This is the ratio of optometrists to people in sub - Saharan Africa .
In fact , there are some countries in sub - Saharan Africa where theres one optometrist for eight million of the population .
How do you do this ? How do you solve this problem ?
I came up with a solution to this problem , and I came up with a solution based on adaptive optics for this .
And the idea is you make eye glasses , and you adjust them yourself and that solves the problem .
What I want to do is to show you that one can make a pair of glasses .
I shall just show you how you make a pair of glasses . I shall pop this in my pocket .
Im short sighted . I look at the signs at the end , I can hardly see them .
So  -  -  okay , I can now see that man running out there , Ive now made prescription eyewear to my prescription .
Next step in my process .
So , Ive now made eye glasses to my prescription .
Okay , so Ive made these glasses and ...
Okay , Ive made the glasses to my prescription and ...
... Ive just ...
And Ive now made some glasses . Thats it .
Now , these arent the only pair in the world .
In fact , this technologys been evolving .
I started working on it in 1985 , and its been evolving very slowly .
There are about 30,000 in use now .
And theyre in fifteen countries . Theyre spread around the world .
And I have a vision , which Ill share with you .
I have a global vision for vision .
And that vision is to try to get a billion people wearing the glasses they need by the year 2020 .
To do that  -  -  this is an early example of the technology .
The technology is being further developed  -  -  the cost has to be brought down .
This pair , in fact , these currently cost about 19 dollars .
But the cost has to be brought right down .
It has to be brought down because were trying to serve populations who live on a dollar a day .
How do you solve this problem ?
You start to get into detail .
And on this slide , Im basically explaining all the problems you have .
How do you distribute ? How do you work out how to fit the thing ?
How do you have people realizing that they have a vision problem ?
How do you deal with the industry ?
And the answer to that is research .
What weve done is to set up the Center for Vision in the Developing World here in the university .
If you want to know more , just come have a look at our website . Thank you .
Julia Bacha : Pay attention to nonviolence
In 2003 , the Palestinian village of Budrus mounted a 10 - month - long nonviolent protest to stop a barrier being built across their olive groves . Did you hear about it ? Didnt think so . Brazilian filmmaker Julia Bacha asks why we only pay attention to violence in the Israel - Palestine conflict  -  -  and not to the nonviolent leaders who may one day bring peace .
Im a filmmaker .
For the last 8 years , I have dedicated my life to documenting the work of Israelis and Palestinians who are trying to end the conflict using peaceful means .
When I travel with my work across Europe and the United States , one question always comes up : Where is the Palestinian Gandhi ?
Why arent Palestinians using nonviolent resistance ?
The challenge I face when I hear this question is that often I have just returned from the Middle East where I spent my time filming dozens of Palestinians who are using nonviolence to defend their lands and water resources from Israeli soldiers and settlers .
These leaders are trying to forge a massive national nonviolent movement to end the occupation and build peace in the region .
Yet , most of you have probably never heard about them .
This divide between whats happening on the ground and perceptions abroad is one of the key reasons why we dont have yet a Palestinian peaceful resistance movement that has been successful .
So Im here today to talk about the power of attention , the power of your attention , and the emergence and development of nonviolent movements in the West Bank , Gaza and elsewhere  -  -  but today , my case study is going to be Palestine .
I believe that whats mostly missing for nonviolence to grow is not for Palestinians to start adopting nonviolence , but for us to start paying attention to those who already are .
Allow me to illustrate this point by taking you to this village called Budrus .
About seven years ago , they faced extinction , because Israel announced it would build a separation barrier , and part of this barrier would be built on top of the village .
They would lose 40 percent of their land and be surrounded , so they would lose free access to the rest of the West Bank .
Through inspired local leadership , they launched a peaceful resistance campaign to stop that from happening .
Let me show you some brief clips , so you have a sense for what that actually looked like on the ground .
Palestinian We were told the wall would separate Palestine from Israel .
Here in Budrus , we realized the wall would steal our land .
Israeli The fence has , in fact , created a solution to terror .
Today youre invited to a peaceful march .
You are joined by dozens of your Israeli brothers and sisters .
Israeli Activist : Nothing scares the army more than nonviolent opposition .
We saw the men trying to push the soldiers , but none of them could do that .
But I think the girls could do it .
Fatah Party Member : We must empty our minds of traditional thinking .
Hamas Party Member : We were in complete harmony , and we wanted to spread it to all of Palestine .
Chanting : One united nation .
Fatah , Hamas and the Popular Front !
News Anchor : The clashes over the fence continue .
Reporter : Israeli border police were sent to disperse the crowd .
They were allowed to use any force necessary .
These are live bullets .
Its like Fallujah . Shooting everywhere .
Israeli Activist : I was sure we were all going to die .
But there were others around me who werent even cowering .
Israeli A nonviolent protest is not going to stop the  unclear  .
Protester : This is a peaceful march .
There is no need to use violence .
Chanting : We can do it ! We can do it !
We can do it !
Julia Bacha : When I first heard about the story of Budrus , I was surprised that the international media had failed to cover the extraordinary set of events that happened seven years ago , in 2003 .
What was even more surprising was the fact that Budrus was successful .
The residents , after 10 months of peaceful resistance , convinced the Israeli government to move the route of the barrier off their lands and to the green line , which is the internationally recognized boundary between Israel and the Palestinian Territories .
The resistance in Budrus has since spread to villages across the West Bank and to Palestinian neighborhoods in Jerusalem .
Yet the media remains mostly silent on these stories .
This silence carries profound consequences for the likelihood that nonviolence can grow , or even survive , in Palestine .
Violent resistance and nonviolent resistance share one very important thing in common ; they are both a form of theater seeking an audience to their cause .
If violent actors are the only ones constantly getting front - page covers and attracting international attention to the Palestinian issue , it becomes very hard for nonviolent leaders to make the case to their communities that civil disobedience is a viable option in addressing their plight .
The power of attention is probably going to come as no surprise to the parents in the room .
The surest way to make your child throw increasingly louder tantrums is by giving him attention the first time he throws a fit .
The tantrum will become what childhood psychologists call a functional behavior , since the child has learned that he can get parental attention out of it .
Parents can incentivize or disincentivize behavior simply by giving or withdrawing attention to their children .
But thats true for adults too .
In fact , the behavior of entire communities and countries can be influenced , depending on where the international community chooses to focus its attention .
I believe that at the core of ending the conflict in the Middle East and bringing peace is for us to transform nonviolence into a functional behavior by giving a lot more attention to the nonviolent leaders on the ground today .
In the course of taking my film to villages in the West Bank , in Gaza and in East Jerusalem , I have seen the impact that even one documentary film can have in influencing the transformation .
In a village called Wallajeh , which sits very close to Jerusalem , the community was facing a very similar plight to Budrus .
They were going to be surrounded , lose a lot of their lands and not have freedom of access , either to the West Bank or Jerusalem .
They had been using nonviolence for about two years but had grown disenchanted since nobody was paying attention .
So we organized a screening .
A week later , they held the most well - attended and disciplined demonstration to date .
The organizers say that the villagers , upon seeing the story of Budrus documented in a film , felt that there were indeed people following what they were doing , that people cared .
So they kept on going .
On the Israeli side , there is a new peace movement called Solidariot , which means solidarity in Hebrew .
The leaders of this movement have been using Budrus as one of their primary recruiting tools .
They report that Israelis who had never been active before , upon seeing the film , understand the power of nonviolence and start joining their activities .
The examples of Wallajeh and the Solidariot movement show that even a small - budget independent film can play a role in transforming nonviolence into a functional behavior .
Now imagine the power that big media players could have if they started covering the weekly nonviolent demonstrations happening in villages like Bilin , Nilin , Wallajeh , in Jerusalem neighborhoods like Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan  -  -  the nonviolent leaders would become more visible , valued and effective in their work .
I believe that the most important thing is to understand that if we dont pay attention to these efforts , they are invisible , and its as if they never happened .
But I have seen first hand that if we do , they will multiply .
If they multiply , their influence will grow in the overall Israeli - Palestinian conflict .
And theirs is the kind of influence that can finally unblock the situation .
These leaders have proven that nonviolence works in places like Budrus .
Lets give them attention so they can prove it works everywhere .
Thank you .
Seth Godin : How to get your ideas to spread
In a world of too many options and too little time , our obvious choice is to just ignore the ordinary stuff . Marketing guru Seth Godin spells out why , when it comes to getting our attention , bad or bizarre ideas are more successful than boring ones .
Im going to give you four specific examples  -  -  and Im going to cover at the end  -  -  about how a company called Silk tripled their sales by doing one thing , how an artist named Jeff Koons went from being a nobody to making a whole bunch of money and having a lot of impact , to how Frank Gehry redefined what it meant to be an architect .
And one of my biggest failures as a marketer in the last few years , a record label I started that had a CD called  Sauce . 
Before I can do that Ive got to tell you about sliced bread , and a guy named Otto Rohwedder .
Now , before sliced bread was invented in the 1910s I wonder what they said ?
Like the greatest invention since ... the telegraph or something .
But this guy named Otto Rohwedder invented sliced bread , and he focused , like most inventors did , on the patent part and the making part .
And the thing about the invention of sliced bread is this  -  -  that for the first 15 years after sliced bread was available no one bought it ; no one knew about it ; it was a complete and total failure .
And the reason is that until Wonder came along and figured out how to spread the idea of sliced bread , no one wanted it .
That the success of sliced bread , like the success of almost everything weve been talking about at this conference , is not always about what the patent is like , or what the factory is like  -  -  its about can you get your idea to spread , or not .
And I think that the way youre going to get what you want , or cause the change that you want to change , to happen , is that youve got to figure out a way to get your ideas to spread .
And it doesnt matter to me whether youre running a coffee shop or youre an intellectual , or youre in business , or youre flying hot air balloons .
I think that all this stuff applies to everybody regardless of what we do .
That what we are living in is a century of idea diffusion .
That people who can spread ideas , regardless of what those ideas are , win .
And when I talk about it I usually pick business because they make the best pictures that you can put in your presentation , and because its the easiest sort of way to keep score .
But I want you to forgive me when I use these examples because Im talking about anything that you decide to spend your time to do .
At the heart of spreading ideas is TV and stuff like TV .
TV and mass media made it really easy to spread ideas in a certain way .
I call it the  TV - industrial complex . 
The way the TV - industrial complex works , is you buy some ads  -  -  interrupt some people  -  -  that gets you distribution .
You use the distribution you get to sell more products .
You take the profit from that to buy more ads .
And it goes around and around and around , the same way that military - industrial complex worked a long time ago .
And that model of , and we heard it yesterday , if we could only get onto the homepage of Google , if we could only figure out how to get promoted there , if we could only figure out how to grab that person by the throat , and tell them about what we want to do .
If we do that then everyone would pay attention , and we would win .
Well , this TV - industrial complex informed my entire childhood and probably yours .
I mean , all of these products succeeded because someone figured out how to touch people in a way they werent expecting , in a way they didnt necessarily want , with an ad , over and over and over again until they bought it .
And the thing thats happened is , they canceled the TV - industrial complex .
That just over the last few years , what anybody who markets anything has discovered is that its not working the way that it used to .
This picture is really fuzzy , I apologize ; I had a bad cold when I took it .
But the product in the blue box in the center is my poster child .
Right . I go to the deli ; Im sick ; I need to buy some medicine .
The brand manager for that blue product spent 100 million dollars trying to interrupt me in one year .
100 million dollars interrupting me with TV commercials and magazine ads and spam and coupons and shelving allowances and spiff  -  -  all so I could ignore every single message .
And I ignored every message because I dont have a pain reliever problem .
I buy the stuff in the yellow box because I always have .
And Im not going to invest a minute of my time to solve her problem , because I dont care .
Heres a magazine called  Hydrate .  Its 180 pages about water .
Right . Articles about water , ads about water .
Imagine what the world was like 40 years ago when it was just the Saturday Evening Post and Time and Newsweek .
Now there are magazines about water .
New products from Coke Japan  -  -  water salad .
OK . Coke Japan comes out with a new product every three weeks , because they have no idea whats going to work and whats not .
I couldnt have written this better myself . It came out four days ago  -  -  I circled the important parts so you can see them here .
Theyve come out ... Arbys is going to spend 85 million dollars promoting an oven mitt with the voice of Tom Arnold , hoping that that will get people to go to Arbys and buy a roast beef sandwich .
Now , I had tried to imagine what could possibly be in an animated TV commercial featuring Tom Arnold , that would get you to get in your car , drive across town and buy a roast beef sandwich .
Now , this is Copernicus , and he was right , when he was talking to anyone who needs to hear your idea .
The world revolves around me . Me , me , me , me , me . My favorite person  -  -  me .
I dont want to get email from anybody ; I want to get  memail . 
So consumers , and I dont just mean people who buy stuff at the Safeway ; I mean people at the Defense Department who might buy something , or people at , you know , the New Yorker who might print your article .
Consumers dont care about you at all ; they just dont care .
Part of the reason is  -  -  theyve got way more choices than they used to , and way less time .
And in a world where we have too many choices and too little time , the obvious thing to do is just ignore stuff .
And my parable here is youre driving down the road and you see a cow , and you keep driving because youve seen cows before .
Cows are invisible . Cows are boring .
Whos going to stop and pull over and say  -  -  oh , look , a cow . Nobody .
But if the cow was purple  -  -  isnt that a great special effect ?
I could do that again if you want it .
If the cow was purple , youd notice it for a while .
I mean , if all cows were purple youd get bored with those , too .
The thing thats going to decide what gets talked about , what gets done , what gets changed , what gets purchased , what gets built , is : is it remarkable ?
And  remarkable  is a really cool word because we think it just means neat , but it also means  -  -  worth making a remark about .
And that is the essence of where idea diffusion is going .
That two of the hottest cars in the United States is a 55,000 - dollar giant car , big enough to hold a mini in its trunk .
People are paying full price for both , and the only thing they have in common is that they dont have anything in common .
Every week the number one best - selling DVD in America changes .
Its never  The Godfather ;  its never  Citizen Kane ;  its always some third rate movie with some second rate star .
But the reason its number one is because thats the week it came out .
Because its new , because its fresh .
Because people saw it and said  -  -  I didnt know that was there  -  -  and they noticed it .
Two of the big success stories of the last 20 years in retail  -  -  one sells things that are super - expensive in a blue box , and one sells things that are as cheap as they can make them .
The only thing they have in common is that theyre different .
Were now in the fashion business , no matter what we do for a living , were in the fashion business .
And the thing is , people in the fashion business know what its like to be in the fashion business  -  -  theyre used to it .
The rest of us have to figure out how to think that way .
How to understand that its not about interrupting people with big full - page ads , or insisting on meetings with people .
But its a totally different sort of process that determines which ideas spread , and which ones dont .
This chair  -  -  they sold a billion dollars worth of Aeron chairs by reinventing what it meant to sell a chair .
They turned a chair from something the purchasing department bought , to something that was a status symbol about where you sat at work .
This guy , Lionel Poilane , the most famous baker in the world  -  -  he died two and a half months ago , and he was a hero of mine and a dear friend .
He lived in Paris . Last year he sold 10 million dollars worth of French bread .
Every loaf baked in a bakery he owned , by one baker at a time , in a wood - fired oven .
And when Lionel started his bakery the French pooh - pooh - ed it .
They didnt want to buy his bread . It didnt look like  French bread . 
It wasnt what they expected .
It was neat ; it was remarkable ; and slowly it spread from one person to another person until finally , it became the official bread of three - star restaurants in Paris .
Now hes in London , and he ships by FedEx all around the world .
What marketers used to do is make average products for average people .
Thats what mass marketing is .
Smooth out the edges ; go for the center ; thats the big market .
They would ignore the geeks , and God forbid , the laggards .
It was all about going for the center .
But in a world where the TV - industrial complex is broken , I dont think thats a strategy we want to use any more .
I think the strategy we want to use is to not market to these people because theyre really good at ignoring you .
But market to these people because they care .
These are the people who are obsessed with something .
And when you talk to them theyll listen because they like listening  -  -  its about them .
And if youre lucky , theyll tell their friends on the rest of the curve , and itll spread .
Itll spread to the entire curve .
They have something I call  otaku   -  -  its a great Japanese word .
It describes the desire of someone whos obsessed to say , drive across Tokyo to try a new ramen noodle place , because thats what they do : they get obsessed with it .
To make a product , to market an idea , to come up with any problem you want to solve that doesnt have a constituency with an otaku , is almost impossible .
Instead , you have to find a group that really , desperately cares about what it is you have to say .
Talk to them and make it easy for them to tell their friends .
Theres a hot sauce otaku , but theres no mustard otaku .
Thats why theres lots and lots and lots of kinds of hot sauces , and not so many kinds of mustard .
Not because its hard to make interesting mustard  -  -  you can make interesting mustard  -  -  but people dont because no ones obsessed with it , and thus no one tells their friends .
Krispy Kreme has figured this whole thing out .
Krispy Kreme has a strategy , and what they do is , they enter a city , they talk to the people with otaku , and then they spread through the city to the people whove just crossed the street .
This yoyo right here cost 112 dollars , but it sleeps for 12 minutes .
Not everybody wants it but they dont care .
They want to talk to the people who do , and maybe itll spread .
These guys make the loudest car stereo in the world .
Its as loud as a 747 jet . You cant get in the car ; its got bulletproof glass on the windows because theyll blow out the windshield otherwise .
But the fact remains that when someone wants to put a couple of speakers in their car , if theyve got the otaku or theyve heard from someone who does , they go ahead and they pick this .
Its really simple  -  -  you sell to the people who are listening , and maybe , just maybe those people tell their friends .
So when Steve Jobs talks to 50,000 people at his keynote , right , who are all tuned in from 130 countries watching his two - hour commercial  -  -  thats the only thing keeping his company in business  -  -  is that those 50,000 people care desperately enough to watch a two - hour commercial , and then tell their friends .
Pearl Jam , 96 albums released in the last two years .
Every one made a profit . How ?
They only sell them on their website .
Those people who buy them on the website have the otaku , and then they tell their friends , and it spreads and it spreads .
This hospital crib cost 10,000 dollars , 10 times the standard .
But hospitals are buying it faster than any other model .
Hard Candy nail polish , doesnt appeal to everybody , but to the people who love it , they talk about it like crazy .
This paint can right here saved the Dutch Boy paint company , making them a fortune . It costs 35 percent more than regular paint because Dutch Boy made a can that people talk about , because its remarkable .
They didnt just slap a new ad on the product ; they changed what it meant to build a paint product .
AmIhotornot.com  -  -  everyday 250,000 people go to this site , run by two volunteers , and I can tell you they are hard graders , and they didnt get this way by advertising a lot .
They got this way by being remarkable , sometimes a little too remarkable .
And this picture frame has a cord going out the back , and you plug it into the wall .
My father has this on his desk , and he sees his grandchildren everyday , changing constantly .
And every single person who walks into his office hears the whole story of how this thing ended up on his desk .
And one person at a time , the idea spreads .
These are not diamonds , not really .
Theyre made from  cremains . 
After youre cremated you can have yourself made into a gem .
Oh , you like my ring ? Its my grandmother .
Fastest - growing business in the whole mortuary industry .
But you dont have to be Ozzie Osborne  -  -  you dont have to be super - outrageous to do this .
What you have to do is figure out what people really want and give it to them .
A couple of quick rules to wrap up .
The first one is : Design is free when you get to scale .
And the people who come up with stuff thats remarkable more often than not figure out how to put design to work for them .
Number two : The riskiest thing you can do now is be safe .
Proctor and Gamble knows this , right ?
The whole model of being Proctor and Gamble is always about average products for average people .
Thats risky . The safe thing to do now is to be at the fringes , be remarkable .
And being very good is one of the worst things you can possibly do .
Very good is boring . Very good is average .
It doesnt matter whether youre making a record album , or youre an architect , or you have a tract on sociology .
If its very good , its not going to work , because no ones going to notice it .
So my three stories .
Silk . Put a product that does not need to be in the refrigerated section next to the milk in the refrigerated section .
Sales tripled . Why ?
Milk , milk , milk , milk , milk  -  -  not milk .
For the people who were there and looking at that section , it was remarkable .
They didnt triple their sales with advertising ; they tripled it by doing something remarkable .
That is a remarkable piece of art . You dont have to like it , but a 40 - foot tall dog made out of bushes in the middle of New York City is remarkable .
Frank Gehry didnt just change a museum ; he changed an entire citys economy by designing one building that people from all over the world went to see .
Now , at countless meetings at , you know , the Portland City Council , or who knows where , they said , we need an architect  -  -  can we get Frank Gehry ?
Because he did something that was at the fringes .
And my big failure ? I came out with an entire record album and hopefully a whole bunch of record albums in SACD format  -  -  this remarkable new format  -  -  and I marketed it straight to people with 20,000 - dollar stereos .
People with 20,000 - dollar stereos dont like new music .
So what you need to do is figure out who does care .
Who is going to raise their hand and say ,  I want to hear what youre doing next ,  and sell something to them .
The last example I want to give you .
This is a map of Soap Lake , Washington .
As you can see , if thats nowhere , its in the middle of it .
But they do have a lake .
And people used to come from miles around to swim in the lake .
They dont anymore . So the founding fathers said ,  Weve got some money to spend .
What can we build here ?  And like most committees , they were going to build something pretty safe .
And then an artist came to them  -  -  this is a true artists rendering  -  -  he wants to build a 55 - foot tall lava lamp in the center of town .
Thats a purple cow ; thats something worth noticing .
I dont know about you but if they build it , thats where Im going to go .
Thank you very much for your attention .
Rob Hopkins : Transition to a world without oil
Rob Hopkins reminds us that the oil our world depends on is steadily running out . He proposes a unique solution to this problem  -  -  the Transition response , where we prepare ourselves for life without oil and sacrifice our luxuries to build systems and communities that are completely independent of fossil fuels .
As a culture , we tell ourselves lots of stories about the future , and where we might move forward from this point .
Some of those stories are that somebody is just going to sort everything out for us .
Other stories are that everything is on the verge of unraveling .
But I want to tell you a different story here today .
Like all stories , it has a beginning .
My work , for a long time , has been involved in education , in teaching people practical skills for sustainability , teaching people how to take responsibility for growing some of their own food , how to build buildings using local materials , how to generate their own energy , and so on .
I lived in Ireland , built the first straw - bale houses in Ireland , and some cob buildings and all this kind of thing .
But all my work for many years was focused around the idea that sustainability means basically looking at the globalized economic growth model , and moderating what comes in at one end , And then I came into contact with a way of looking at things which actually changed that profoundly .
And in order to introduce you to that , Ive got something here that Im going to unveil , which is one of the great marvels of the modern age .
And its something so astounding and so astonishing that I think maybe as I remove this cloth a suitable gasp of amazement might be appropriate .
If you could help me with that it would be fantastic .
This is a liter of oil .
This bottle of oil , distilled over a hundred million years of geological time , ancient sunlight , contains the energy equivalent of about five weeks hard human manual labor  -  -  equivalent to about 35 strong people coming round and working for you .
We can turn it into a dazzling array of materials , medicine , modern clothing , laptops , a whole range of different things .
It gives us an energy return thats unimaginable , historically .
Weve based the design of our settlements , our business models , our transport plans , even the idea of economic growth , some would argue , on the assumption that we will have this in perpetuity .
Yet , when we take a step back , and look over the span of history , at what we might call the petroleum interval , its a short period in history where weve discovered this extraordinary material , and then based a whole way of life around it .
But as we straddle the top of this energy mountain , at this stage , we move from a time where our economic success , our sense of individual prowess and well - being is directly linked to how much of this we consume , to a time when actually our degree of oil dependency is our degree of vulnerability .
And its increasingly clear that we arent going to be able to rely on the fact that were going to have this at our disposal forever .
For every four barrels of oil that we consume , we only discover one .
And that gap continues to widen .
There is also the fact that the amount of energy that we get back from the oil that we discover is falling .
In the 1930s we got 100 units of energy back for every one that we put in to extract it .
Completely unprecedented , historically .
Already thats fallen to about 11 .
And thats why , now , the new breakthroughs , the new frontiers in terms of oil extraction are scrambling about in Alberta , or at the bottom of the oceans .
There are 98 oil - producing nations in the world .
But of those , 65 have already passed their peak .
The moment when the world on average passes this peak , people wonder when thats going to happen .
And there is an emerging case that maybe that was what happened last July when the oil prices were so high .
But are we to assume that the same brilliance and creativity and adaptability that got us up to the top of that energy mountain in the first place is somehow mysteriously going to evaporate when we have to design a creative way back down the other side ?
No . But the thinking that we have to come up with has to be based on a realistic assessment of where we are .
There is also the issue of climate change , is the other thing that underpins this transition approach .
But the thing that I notice , as I talk to climate scientists , is the increasingly terrified look they have in their eyes , as the data thats coming in , which is far ahead of what the IPCC are talking about .
So the IPCC said that we might see significant breakup of the arctic ice in 2100 , in their worst case scenario .
Actually , if current trends continue , it could all be gone in five or 10 years time .
If just three percent of the carbon locked up in the arctic permafrost is released as the world warms , it would offset all the savings that we need to make , in carbon , over the next 40 years to avoid runaway climate change .
We have no choice other than deep and urgent decarbonization .
But Im always very interested to think about what might the stories be that the generations further down the slope from us are going to tell about us .
 The generation that lived at the top of the mountain , that partied so hard , and so abused its inheritance . 
And one of the ways I like to do that is to look back at the stories people used to tell before we had cheap oil , before we had fossil fuels , and people relied on their own muscle , animal muscle energy , or a little bit of wind , little bit of water energy .
We had stories like  The Seven - League Boots  : the giant who had these boots , where , once you put them on , with every stride you could cover seven leagues , or 21 miles , a kind of travel completely unimaginable to people without that kind of energy at their disposal .
Stories like The Magic Porridge Pot , where you had a pot where if you knew the magic words , this pot would just make as much food as you liked , without you having to do any work , provided you could remember the other magic word to stop it making porridge .
Otherwise youd flood your entire town with warm porridge .
There is the story of  The Elves and the Shoemaker . 
The people who make shoes go to sleep , wake up in the morning , and all the shoes are magically made for them .
Its something that was unimaginable to people then .
Now we have the seven - league boots in the form of Ryanair and Easyjet .
We have the magic porridge pot in the form of Walmart and Tesco .
And we have the elves in the form of China .
But we dont appreciate what an astonishing thing that has been .
And what are the stories that we tell ourselves now , as we look forward about where were going to go .
And I would argue that there are four . There is the idea of business as usual , that the future will be like the present , just more of it .
But as weve seen over the last year , I think thats an idea that is increasingly coming into question .
And in terms of climate change , is something that is not actually feasible .
There is the idea of hitting the wall , that actually somehow everything is so fragile that it might just all unravel and collapse .
This is a popular story in some places .
The third story is the idea that technology can solve everything , that technology can somehow get us through this completely .
And its an idea that I think is very prevalent at these TED Talks , the idea that we can invent our way out of a profound economic and energy crisis , that a move to a knowledge economy can somehow neatly sidestep those energy constraints , the idea that well discover some fabulous new source of energy that will mean we can sweep all concerns about energy security to one side , the idea that we can step off neatly onto a completely renewable world .
But the world isnt Second Life .
We cant create new land and new energy systems at the click of a mouse .
And as we sit , exchanging free ideas with each other , there are still people mining coal in order to power the servers , extracting the minerals to make all of those things .
The breakfast that we eat as we sit down to check our email in the morning is still transported at great distances , usually at the expense of the local , more resilient food systems that would have supplied that in the past , which weve so effectively devalued and dismantled .
We can be astonishingly inventive and creative .
But we also live in a world with very real constraints and demands .
Energy and technology are not the same thing .
What Im involved with is the transition response .
And this is really about looking the challenges of peak oil and climate change square in the face , and responding with a creativity and an adaptability and an imagination that we really need .
Its something which has spread incredibly fast .
And it is something which has several characteristics .
Its viral . It seems to spread under the radar very , very quickly .
Its open source . Its something which everybody whos involved with it develops and passes on as they work with it .
Its self - organizing . There is no great central organization that pushes this ; people just pick up an idea and they run with it , and they implement it where they are .
Its solutions - focused . Its very much looking at what people can do where they are , to respond to this .
Its sensitive to place and to scale .
Transitional is completely different .
Transition groups in Chile , transition groups in the U.S . , transition groups here , what theyre doing looks very different in every place that you go to .
It learns very much from its mistakes .
And it feels historic . It tries to create a sense that this is a historic opportunity to do something really extraordinary .
And its a process which is really joyful .
People have a huge amount of fun doing this , reconnecting with other people as they do it .
One of the things that underpins it is this idea of resilience .
And I think , in many ways , the idea of resilience is a more useful concept than the idea of sustainability .
The idea of resilience comes from the study of ecology .
And its really about how systems , settlements , withstand shock from the outside .
When they encounter shock from the outside that they dont just unravel and fall to pieces .
And I think its a more useful concept than sustainability , as I said .
When our supermarkets have only two or three days worth of food in them at any one time , often sustainability tends to focus on the energy efficiency of the freezers and on the packaging that the lettuces are wrapped up in .
Looking through the lens of resilience , we really question how weve let ourselves get into a situation thats so vulnerable .
Resilience runs much deeper : its about building modularity into what we do , building surge breakers into how we organize the basic things that support us .
This is a photograph of the Bristol and District Market Gardeners Association , in 1897 .
This is at a time when the city of Bristol , which is quite close to here , was surrounded by commercial market gardens , which provided a significant amount of the food that was consumed in the town , and created a lot of employment for people , as well .
There was a degree of resilience , if you like , at that time , which we can now only look back on with envy .
So how does this transition idea work ?
So basically , you have a group of people who are excited by the idea .
They pick up some of the tools that weve developed .
They start to run an awareness - raising program looking at how this might actually work in the town .
They show films , they give talks , and so on .
Its a process which is playful and creative and informative .
Then they start to form working groups , looking at different aspects of this , and then from that , there emerge a whole lot of projects which then the transition project itself starts to support and enable .
So it started out with some work I was involved in in Ireland , where I was teaching , and has since spread .
There are now over 200 formal transition projects .
And there are thousands of others who are at what we call the mulling stage .
They are mulling whether theyre going to take it further .
And actually a lot of them are doing huge amounts of stuff .
But what do they actually do ? You know , its a kind of nice idea , but what do they actually do on the ground ?
Well , I think its really important to make the point that actually you know , this isnt something which is going to do everything on its own .
We need international legislation from Copenhagen and so on .
We need national responses . We need local government responses .
But all of those things are going to be much easier if we have communities that are vibrant and coming up with ideas and leading from the front , making unelectable policies electable , over the next 5 to 10 years .
Some of the things that emerge from it are local food projects , like community - supported agriculture schemes , urban food production , creating local food directories , and so on .
A lot of places now are starting to set up their own energy companies , community - owned energy companies , where the community can invest money into itself , to start putting in place the kind of renewable energy infrastructure that we need .
A lot of places are working with their local schools .
Newent in the Forest of Dean : big polytunnel they built for the school ; the kids are learning how to grow food .
Promoting recycling , things like garden - share , that matches up people who dont have a garden who would like to grow food , with people who have gardens they arent using anymore .
Planting productive trees throughout urban spaces .
And also starting to play around with the idea of alternative currencies .
This is Lewes in Sussex , who have recently launched the Lewes Pound , a currency that you can only spend within the town , as a way of starting to cycle money within the local economy .
You take it anywhere else , its not worth anything .
But actually within the town you start to create these economic cycles much more effectively .
Another thing that they do is what we call an energy descent plan , which is basically to develop a plan B for the town .
Most of our local authorities , when they sit down to plan for the next five , 10 , 15 , 20 years of a community , still start by assuming that there will be more energy , more cars , more housing , more jobs , more growth , and so on .
What does it look like if thats not the case ? And how can we embrace that and actually come up with something that was actually more likely to sustain everybody ?
As a friend of mine says ,  Life is a series of things youre not quite ready for . 
And thats certainly been my experience with transition .
From three years ago , it just being an idea , this has become something that has virally swept around the world .
Were getting a lot of interest from government . Ed Miliband , the energy minister of this country , was invited to come to our recent conference as a keynote listener .
Which he did  -  -   -  -  and has since become a great advocate of the whole idea .
There are now two local authorities in this country who have declared themselves transitional local authorities , Leicestershire and Somerset . And in Stroud , the transition group there , in effect , wrote the local governments food plan .
And the head of the council said ,  If we didnt have Transition Stroud , we would have to invent all of that community infrastructure for the first time . 
As we see the spread of it , we see national hubs emerging .
In Scotland , the Scottish governments climate change fund has funded Transition Scotland as a national organization supporting the spread of this .
And we see it all over the place as well now .
But the key to transition is thinking not that we have to change everything now , but that things are already inevitably changing , and what we need to do is to work creatively with that , based on asking the right questions .
I think Id like to just return at the end to the idea of stories .
Because I think stories are vital here .
And actually the stories that we tell ourselves , we have a huge dearth of stories about how to move forward creatively from here .
And one of the key things that transition does is to pull those stories out of what people are doing .
Stories about the community thats produced its own 21 pound note , for example , the school thats turned its car park into a food garden , the community thats founded its own energy company .
And for me , one of the great stories recently was the Obamas digging up the south lawn of the White House to create a vegetable garden . Because the last time that was done , when Eleanor Roosevelt did it , it led to the creation of 20 million vegetable gardens across the United States .
So the question Id like to leave you with , really , is  -  -  for all aspects of the things that your community needs in order to thrive , how can it be done in such a way that drastically reduces its carbon emissions , while also building resilience ?
Personally , I feel enormously grateful to have lived through the age of cheap oil .
Ive been astonishingly lucky , weve been astonishingly lucky .
But let us honor what it has bought us , and move forward from this point .
Because if we cling to it , and continue to assume that it can underpin our choices , the future that it presents to us is one which is really unmanageable .
And by loving and leaving all that oil has done for us , and that the Oil Age has done for us , we are able to then begin the creation of a world which is more resilient , more nourishing , and in which , we find ourselves fitter , more skilled and more connected to each other .
Thank you very much .
Elizabeth Pisani : Sex , drugs and HIV  -  -  lets get rational
Armed with bracing logic , wit and her  public - health nerd  glasses , Elizabeth Pisani reveals the myriad of inconsistencies in todays political systems that prevent our dollars from effectively fighting the spread of HIV . Her research with at - risk populations  -  -  from junkies in prison to sex workers on the street in Cambodia  -  -  demonstrates the sometimes counter - intuitive measures that could stall the spread of this devastating disease .
 People do stupid things .
Thats what spreads HIV . 
This was a headline in a U.K . newspaper , The Guardian , not that long ago .
Im curious , show of hands , who agrees with it ?
Well , one or two brave souls .
This is actually a direct quote from an epidemiologist whos been in field of HIV for 15 years , worked on four continents , and youre looking at her .
And I am now going to argue that this is only half true .
People do get HIV because they do stupid things , but most of them are doing stupid things for perfectly rational reasons .
Now ,  rational  is the dominant paradigm in public health , and if you put your public health nerd glasses on , youll see that if we give people the information that they need about whats good for them and whats bad for them , if you give them the services that they can use to act on that information , and a little bit of motivation , people will make rational decisions and live long and healthy lives .
Wonderful .
Thats slightly problematic for me because I work in HIV , and although Im sure you all know that HIV is about poverty and gender inequality , and if you were at TED 07 its about coffee prices ...
Actually , HIVs about sex and drugs , and if there are two things that make human beings a little bit irrational , they are erections and addiction .
So , lets start with whats rational for an addict .
Now , I remember speaking to an Indonesian friend of mine , Frankie .
We were having lunch and he was telling me about when he was in jail in Bali for a drug injection .
It was someones birthday , and they had very kindly smuggled some heroin into jail , and he was very generously sharing it out with all of his colleagues .
And so everyone lined up , all the smackheads in a row , and the guy whose birthday it was filled up the fit , and he went down and started injecting people .
So he injects the first guy , and then hes wiping the needle on his shirt , and he injects the next guy .
And Frankie says ,  Im number 22 in line , and I can see the needle coming down towards me , and there is blood all over the place .
Its getting blunter and blunter .
And a small part of my brain is thinking , That is so gross and really dangerous , but most of my brain is thinking , Please let there be some smack left by the time it gets to me .
Please let there be some left .  And then , telling me this story , Frankie said ,  You know ... God , drugs really make you stupid . 
And , you know , you cant fault him for accuracy .
But , actually , Frankie , at that time , was a heroin addict and he was in jail .
So his choice was either to accept that dirty needle or not to get high .
And if theres one place you really want to get high , its when youre in jail .
But Im a scientist and I dont like to make data out of anecdotes , so lets look at some data .
We talked to 600 drug addicts in three cities in Indonesia , and we said ,  Well , do you know how you get HIV ? 
 Oh yeah , by sharing needles . 
I mean , nearly 100 percent . Yeah , by sharing needles .
And ,  Do you know where you can get a clean needle at a price you can afford to avoid that ? 
 Oh yeah .  Hundred percent .
 Were smackheads ; we know where to get clean needles . 
 So are you carrying a needle ? 
Were actually interviewing people on the street , in the places where theyre hanging out and taking drugs .
 Are you carrying clean needles ? 
One in four , maximum .
So no surprises then that the proportion that actually used clean needles every time they injected in the last week is just about one in 10 , and the other nine in 10 are sharing .
So youve got this massive mismatch ; everyone knows that if they share theyre going to get HIV , but theyre all sharing anyway .
So whats that about ? Is it like you get a better high if you share or something ?
We asked that to a junkie and theyre like ,  Are you nuts ? 
You dont want to share a needle anymore than you want to share a toothbrush even with someone youre sleeping with .
Theres just kind of an ick factor there .
 No , no . We share needles because we dont want to go to jail . 
So , in Indonesia at this time , if you were carrying a needle and the cops rounded you up , they could put you into jail .
And that changes the equation slightly , doesnt it ?
Because your choice now is either I use my own needle now , or I could share a needle now and get a disease thats going to possibly kill me 10 years from now , or I could use my own needle now and go to jail tomorrow .
And while junkies think that its a really bad idea to expose themselves to HIV , they think its a much worse idea to spend the next year in jail where theyll probably end up in Frankies situation and expose themselves to HIV anyway .
So , suddenly it becomes perfectly rational to share needles .
Now , lets look at it from a policy makers point of view .
This is a really easy problem .
For once , your incentives are aligned .
Weve got whats rational for public health .
You want people to use clean needles  -  -  and junkies want to use clean needles .
So we could make this problem go away simply by making clean needles universally available and taking away the fear of arrest .
Now , the first person to figure that out and do something about it on a national scale was that well - known , bleeding heart liberal Margaret Thatcher .
And she put in the worlds first national needle exchange program , and other countries followed suit : Australia , The Netherlands and few others .
And in all of those countries , you can see , not more than four percent of injectors ever became infected with HIV .
Now , places that didnt do this  -  -  New York City for example , Moscow , Jakarta  -  -  were talking , at its peak , one in two injectors infected with this fatal disease .
Now , Margaret Thatcher didnt do this because she has any great love for junkies .
She did it because she ran a country that had a national health service .
So , if she didnt invest in effective prevention , she was going to have pick up the costs of treatment later on , and obviously those are much higher .
So she was making a politically rational decision .
Now , if I take out my public health nerd glasses here and look at these data , it seems like a no - brainer , doesnt it ?
But in this country , where the government apparently does not feel compelled to provide health care for citizens , weve taken a very different approach .
So what weve been doing in the United States is reviewing the data  -  -  endlessly reviewing the data .
So , these are reviews of hundreds of studies by all the big muckety - mucks of the scientific pantheon in the United States , and these are the studies that show needle programs are effective  -  -  quite a lot of them .
Now , the ones that show that needle programs arent effective  -  -  you think thats one of these annoying dynamic slides and Im going to press my dongle and the rest of its going to come up , but no  -  -  thats the whole slide .
There is nothing on the other side .
So , completely irrational , you would think .
Except that , wait a minute , politicians are rational , too , and theyre responding to what they think the voters want .
So what we see is that voters respond very well to things like this and not quite so well to things like this .
So it becomes quite rational to deny services to injectors .
Now lets talk about sex .
Are we any more rational about sex ?
Well , Im not even going to address the clearly irrational positions of people like the Catholic Church , who think somehow that if you give out condoms , everyones going to run out and have sex .
I dont know if Pope Benedict watches TEDTalks online , but if you do , Ive got news for you Benedict  -  -  I carry condoms all the time and I never get laid .
Its not that easy !
Here , maybe youll have better luck .
Okay , seriously , HIV is actually not that easy to transmit sexually .
So , it depends on how much virus there is in your blood and in your body fluids .
And what weve got is a very , very high level of virus right at the beginning when youre first infected , then you start making antibodies , and then it bumps along at quite low levels for a long time  -  -  10 or 12 years  -  -  you have spikes if you get another sexually transmitted infection .
But basically , nothing much is going on until you start to get symptomatic AIDS , and by that stage , youre not looking great , youre not feeling great , youre not having that much sex .
So the sexual transmission of HIV is essentially determined by how many partners you have in these very short spaces of time when you have peak viremia .
Now , this makes people crazy because it means that you have to talk about some groups having more sexual partners in shorter spaces of time than other groups , and thats considered stigmatizing .
Ive always been a bit curious about that because I think stigma is a bad thing , whereas lots of sex is quite a good thing , but well leave that be .
The truth is that 20 years of very good research have shown us that there are groups that are more likely to turnover large numbers of partners in a short space of time .
And those groups are , globally , people who sell sex and their more regular partners .
They are gay men on the party scene who have , on average , three times more partners than straight people on the party scene .
And they are heterosexuals who come from countries that have traditions of polygamy and relatively high levels of female autonomy , and almost all of those countries are in east or southern Africa .
And that is reflected in the epidemic that we have today .
You can see these horrifying figures from Africa .
These are all countries in southern Africa where between one in seven , and one in three of all adults , are infected with HIV .
Now , in the rest of the world , weve got basically nothing going on in the general population  -  -  very , very low levels  -  -  but we have extraordinarily high levels of HIV in these other populations who are at highest risk : drug injectors , sex workers and gay men .
And youll note , thats the local data from Los Angeles : 25 percent prevalence among gay men .
Of course , you cant get HIV just by having unprotected sex .
You can only HIV by having unprotected sex with a positive person .
In most of the world , these few prevention failures notwithstanding , we are actually doing quite well these days in commercial sex : condom use rates are between 80 and 100 percent in commercial sex in most countries .
And , again , its because of an alignment of the incentives .
Whats rational for public health is also rational for individual sex workers because its really bad for business to have another STI .
No one wants it .
And , actually , clients dont want to go home with a drip either .
So essentially , youre able to achieve quite high rates of condom use in commercial sex .
But in  intimate  relations its much more difficult because , with your wife or your boyfriend or someone that you hope might turn into one of those things , we have this illusion of romance and trust and intimacy , and nothing is quite so unromantic as the ,  My condom or yours , darling ?  question .
So in the face of that , you really need quite a strong incentive to use condoms .
This , for example , this gentleman is called Joseph .
Hes from Haiti and he has AIDS .
And hes probably not having a lot of sex right now , but he is a reminder in the population , of why you might want to be using condoms .
This is also in Haiti and is a reminder of why you might want to be having sex , perhaps .
Now , funnily enough , this is also Joseph after six months on antiretroviral treatment .
Not for nothing do we call it the Lazarus Effect .
But it is changing the equation of whats rational in sexual decision - making .
So , what weve got  -  -  some people say ,  Oh , it doesnt matter very much because , actually , treatment is effective prevention because it lowers your viral load and therefore makes it more difficult to transmit HIV . 
So , if you look at the viremia thing again , if you do start treatment when youre sick , well , what happens ? Your viral load comes down .
But compared to what ? What happens if youre not on treatment ?
Well , you die , so your viral load goes to zero .
And all of this green stuff here , including the spikes  -  -  which are because you couldnt get to the pharmacy , or you ran out of drugs , or you went on a three day party binge and forgot to take your drugs , or because youve started to get resistance , or whatever  -  -  all of that is virus that wouldnt be out there , except for treatment .
Now , am I saying ,  Oh , well , great prevention strategy .
Lets just stop treating people . 
Of course not , of course not .
We need to expand antiretroviral treatment as much as we can .
But what I am doing is calling into question those people who say that more treatment is all the prevention we need .
Thats simply not necessarily true , and I think we can learn a lot from the experience of gay men in rich countries where treatment has been widely available for going on 15 years now .
And what weve seen is that , actually , condom use rates , which were very , very high  -  -  the gay community responded very rapidly to HIV , with extremely little help from public health nerds , I would say  -  -  that condom use rate has come down dramatically since treatment for two reasons really : One is the assumption of ,  Oh well , if hes infected , hes probably on meds , and his viral loads going to be low , so Im pretty safe . 
And the other thing is that people are simply not as scared of HIV as they were of AIDS , and rightly so .
AIDS was a disfiguring disease that killed you , and HIV is an invisible virus that makes you take a pill every day .
And thats boring , but is it as boring as having to use a condom every time you have sex , no matter how drunk you are , no matter how many poppers youve taken , whatever ?
If we look at the data , we can see that the answer to that question is , mmm .
So these are data from Scotland .
You see the peak in drug injectors before they started the national needle exchange program .
Then it came way down .
And both in heterosexuals  -  -  mostly in commercial sex  -  -  and in drug users , youve really got nothing much going on after treatment begins , and thats because of that alignment of incentives that I talked about earlier .
But in gay men , youve got quite a dramatic rise starting three or four years after treatment became widely available .
This is of new infections .
What does that mean ?
It means that the combined effect of being less worried and having more virus out there in the population  -  -  more people living longer , healthier lives , more likely to be getting laid with HIV  -  -  is outweighing the effects of lower viral load , and thats a very worrisome thing .
What does it mean ?
It means we need to be doing more prevention the more treatment we have .
Is that whats happening ?
No , and I call it the  compassion conundrum . 
Weve talked a lot about compassion the last couple of days , and whats happening really is that people are unable quite to bring themselves to put in good sexual and reproductive health services for sex workers , unable quite to be giving out needles to junkies .
But once theyve gone from being transgressive people whose behaviors we dont want to condone to being AIDS victims , we come over all compassionate and buy them incredibly expensive drugs for the rest of their lives .
It doesnt make any sense from a public health point of view .
I want to give whats very nearly the last word to Ines .
Ines is a a transgender hooker on the streets of Jakarta ; shes a chick with a dick .
Why does she do that job ?
Well , of course , because shes forced into it because she doesnt have any better option , etc . , etc .
And if we could just teach her to sew and get her a nice job in a factory , all would be well .
This is what factory workers earn in an hour in Indonesia : on average , 20 cents .
It varies a bit province to province .
I do speak to sex workers , 15,000 of them for this particular slide , and this is what sex workers say they earn in an hour .
So its not a great job , but for a lot of people it really is quite a rational choice .
Okay , Ines .
Weve got the tools , the knowledge and the cash , and commitment to preventing HIV too .
Ines : So why is prevalence still rising ?
Its all politics .
When you get to politics , nothing makes sense .
Elizabeth Pisani :  When you get to politics , nothing makes sense . 
So , from the point of view of a sex worker , politicians are making no sense .
From the point of view of a public health nerd , junkies are doing dumb things .
The truth is that everyone has a different rationale .
There are as many different ways of being rational as there are human beings on the planet , and thats one of the glories of human existence .
But those ways of being rational are not independent of one another , so its rational for a drug injector to share needles because of a stupid decision thats made by a politician , and its rational for a politician to make that stupid decision because theyre responding to what they think the voters want .
But heres the thing : we are the voters .
Were not all of them , of course , but TED is a community of opinion leaders .
And everyone whos in this room , and everyone whos watching this out there on the web , I think , has a duty to demand of their politicians that we make policy based on scientific evidence and on common sense .
Its going to be really hard for us to individually affect whats rational for every Frankie and every Ines out there , but you can at least use your vote to stop politicians doing stupid things that spread HIV .
Thank you .
Ellen Dunham - Jones : Retrofitting suburbia
Ellen Dunham - Jones fires the starting shot for the next 50 years big sustainable design project : retrofitting suburbia . To come : Dying malls rehabilitated , dead  big box  stores re - inhabited , parking lots transformed into thriving wetlands . 
In the last 50 years , weve been building the suburbs with a lot of unintended consequences .
And Im going to talk about some of those consequences and just present a whole bunch of really interesting projects that I think give us tremendous reasons to be really optimistic that the big design and development project of the next 50 years is going to be retrofitting suburbia .
So whether its redeveloping dying malls or re - inhabiting dead big - box stores or reconstructing wetlands out of parking lots , I think the fact is the growing number of empty and under - performing , especially retail , sites throughout suburbia gives us actually a tremendous opportunity to take our least - sustainable landscapes right now and convert them into more sustainable places .
And in the process , what that allows us to do is to redirect a lot more of our growth back into existing communities that could use a boost , and have the infrastructure in place , instead of continuing to tear down trees and to tear up the green space out at the edges .
So why is this important ?
I think there are any number of reasons , and Im just going to not get into detail but mention a few .
Just from the perspective of climate change , the average urban dweller in the U.S .
has about one - third the carbon footprint of the average suburban dweller , mostly because suburbanites drive a lot more , and living in detached buildings , you have that much more exterior surface to leak energy out of .
So strictly from a climate change perspective , the cities are already relatively green .
The big opportunity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is actually in urbanizing the suburbs .
All that driving that weve been doing out in the suburbs , we have doubled the amount of miles we drive .
Its increased our dependence on foreign oil despite the gains in fuel efficiency .
Were just driving so much more ; we havent been able to keep up technologically .
Public health is another reason to consider retrofitting .
Researchers at the CDC and other places have increasingly been linking suburban development patterns with sedentary lifestyles .
And those have been linked then with the rather alarming , growing rates of obesity , shown in these maps here , and that obesity has also been triggering great increases in heart disease and diabetes to the point where a child born today has a one - in - three chance of developing diabetes .
And that rate has been escalating at the same rate as children not walking to school anymore , again , because of our development patterns .
And then theres finally  -  -  theres the affordability question .
I mean , how affordable is it to continue to live in suburbia with rising gas prices ?
Suburban expansion to cheap land , for the last 50 years  -  -  you know the cheap land out on the edge  -  -  has helped generations of families enjoy the American dream .
But increasingly , the savings promised by drive - till - you - qualify affordability  -  -  which is basically our model  -  -  those savings are wiped out when you consider the transportation costs .
For instance , here in Atlanta , about half of households make between $ 20,000 and $ 50,000 a year , and they are spending 29 percent of their income on housing and 32 percent on transportation .
I mean , thats 2005 figures .
Thats before we got up to the four bucks a gallon .
You know , none of us really tend to do the math on our transportation costs , and theyre not going down any time soon .
Whether you love suburbias leafy privacy or you hate its soulless commercial strips , there are reasons why its important to retrofit .
But is it practical ?
I think it is .
June Williamson and I have been researching this topic for over a decade , and weve found over 80 varied projects .
But that theyre really all market driven , and whats driving the market in particular  -  -  number one  -  -  is major demographic shifts .
We all tend to think of suburbia as this very family - focused place , but thats really not the case anymore .
Since 2000 , already two - thirds of households in suburbia did not have kids in them .
We just havent caught up with the actual realities of this .
The reasons for this have a lot to with the dominance of the two big demographic groups right now : the Baby Boomers retiring  -  -  and then theres a gap , Generation X , which is a small generation .
Theyre still having kids  -  -  but Generation Y hasnt even started hitting child - rearing age .
Theyre the other big generation .
So as a result of that , demographers predict that through 2025 , 75 to 85 percent of new households will not have kids in them .
And the market research , consumer research , asking the Boomers and Gen Y what it is they would like , what they would like to live in , tells us there is going to be a huge demand  -  -  and were already seeing it  -  -  for more urban lifestyles within suburbia .
That basically , the Boomers want to be able to age in place , and Gen Y would like to live an urban lifestyle , but most of their jobs will continue to be out in suburbia .
The other big dynamic of change is the sheer performance of underperforming asphalt .
Now I keep thinking this would be a great name for an indie rock band , but developers generally use it to refer to underused parking lots  -  -  and suburbia is full of them .
When the postwar suburbs were first built out on the cheap land away from downtown , it made sense to just build surface parking lots .
But those sites have now been leapfrogged and leapfrogged again , as weve just continued to sprawl , and they now have a relatively central location .
It no longer just makes sense .
That land is more valuable than just surface parking lots .
It now makes sense to go back in , build a deck and build up on those sites .
So what do you do with a dead mall , dead office park ?
It turns out , all sorts of things .
In a slow economy like ours , re - inhabitation is one of the more popular strategies .
So this happens to be a dead mall in St . Louis thats been re - inhabited as art - space .
Its now home to artist studios , theater groups , dance troupes .
Its not pulling in as much tax revenue as it once was , but its serving its community .
Its keeping the lights on .
Its becoming , I think , a really great institution .
Other malls have been re - inhabited as nursing homes , as universities , and as all variety of office space .
We also found a lot of examples of dead big - box stores that have been converted into all sorts of community - serving uses as well  -  -  lots of schools , lots of churches and lots of libraries like this one .
This was a little grocery store , a Food Lion grocery store , that is now a public library .
In addition to , I think , doing a beautiful adaptive reuse , they tore up some of the parking spaces , put in bioswales to collect and clean the runoff , put in a lot more sidewalks to connect to the neighborhoods .
And theyve made this , what was just a store along a commercial strip , into a community gathering space .
This one is a little L - shaped strip shopping center in Phoenix , Arizona .
Really all they did was they gave it a fresh coat of bright paint , a gourmet grocery , and they put up a restaurant in the old post office .
Never underestimate the power of food to turn a place around and make it a destination .
Its been so successful , theyve now taken over the strip across the street .
The real estate ads in the neighborhood all very proudly proclaim ,  Walking distance to Le Grande Orange ,  because it provided its neighborhood with what sociologists like to call  a third place . 
If home is the first place and work is the second place , the third place is where you go to hang out and build community .
And especially as suburbia is becoming less centered on the family , the family households , theres a real hunger for more third places .
So the most dramatic retrofits are really those in the next category , the next strategy : redevelopment .
Now , during the boom , there were several really dramatic redevelopment projects where the original building was scraped to the ground and then the whole site was rebuilt at significantly greater density , a sort of compact , walkable urban neighborhoods .
But some of them have been much more incremental .
This is Mashpee Commons , the oldest retrofit that weve found .
And its just incrementally , over the last 20 years , built urbanism on top of its parking lots .
So the black and white photo shows the simple 60s strip shopping center .
And then the maps above that show its gradual transformation into a compact , mixed - use New England village , and it has plans now that have been approved for it to connect to new residential neighborhoods across the arterials and over to the other side .
So , you know , sometimes its incremental .
Sometimes , its all at once .
This is another infill project on the parking lots , this one of an office park outside of Washington D.C .
When Metrorail expanded transit into the suburbs and opened a station nearby to this site , the owners decided to build a new parking deck and then insert on top of their surface lots a new Main Street , several apartments and condo buildings , while keeping the existing office buildings .
Here is the site in 1940 : It was just a little farm in the village of Hyattsville .
By 1980 , it had been subdivided into a big mall on one side and the office park on the other and then some buffer sites for a library and a church to the far right .
Today , the transit , the Main Street and the new housing have all been built .
Eventually , I expect that the streets will probably extend through a redevelopment of the mall .
Plans have already been announced for a lot of those garden apartments above the mall to be redeveloped .
Transit is a big driver of retrofits .
So heres what it looks like .
You can sort of see the funky new condo buildings in between the office buildings and the public space and the new Main Street .
This one is one of my favorites , Belmar .
I think they really built an attractive place here and have just employed all - green construction .
Theres massive P.V . arrays on the roofs as well as wind turbines .
This was a very large mall on a hundred - acre superblock .
Its now 22 walkable urban blocks with public streets , two public parks , eight bus lines and a range of housing types , and so its really given Lakewood , Colorado the downtown that this particular suburb never had .
Here was the mall in its heyday .
They had their prom in the mall . They loved their mall .
So heres the site in 1975 with the mall .
By 1995 , the mall has died .
The department store has been kept  -  -  and we found this was true in many cases .
The department stores are multistory ; theyre better built .
Theyre easy to be re - adapted .
But the one story stuff ...
thats really history .
So here it is at projected build - out .
This project , I think , has great connectivity to the existing neighborhoods .
Its providing 1,500 households with the option of a more urban lifestyle .
Its about two - thirds built out right now .
Heres what the new Main Street looks like .
Its very successful , and its helped to prompt  -  -  regional malls in Denver have now , or have announced plans to be , retrofitted .
But its important to note that all of this retrofitting is not occurring  -  -  just bulldozers are coming and just plowing down the whole city .
No , its pockets of walkability on the sites of under - performing properties .
And so its giving people more choices , but its not taking away choices .
But its also not really enough to just create pockets of walkability .
You want to also try to get more systemic transformation .
We need to also retrofit the corridors themselves .
So this is one that has been retrofitted in California .
They took the commercial strip shown on the black - and - white images below , and they built a boulevard that has become the Main Street for their town .
And its transformed from being an ugly , unsafe , undesirable address , to becoming a beautiful , attractive , dignified sort of good address .
I mean now were hoping we start to see it ; theyve already built City Hall , attracted two hotels .
I could imagine beautiful housing going up along there without tearing down another tree .
So theres a lot of great things , but Id love to see more corridors getting retrofitting .
But densification is not going to work everywhere .
Sometimes re - greening is really the better answer .
Theres a lot to learn from successful landbanking programs in cities like Flint , Michigan .
Theres also a burgeoning suburban farming movement  -  -  sort of victory gardens meets the Internet .
But perhaps one of the most important re - greening aspects is the opportunity to restore the local ecology , as in this example outside of Minneapolis .
When the shopping center died , the city restored the sites original wetlands , creating lakefront property , which then attracted private investment , the first private investment to this very low - income neighborhood in over 40 years .
So theyve managed to both restore the local ecology and the local economy at the same time .
This is another re - greening example .
It also makes sense in very strong markets .
This one in Seattle is on the site of a mall parking lot adjacent to a new transit stop .
And the wavy line is a path alongside a creek that has now been daylit .
The creek had been culverted under the parking lot .
But daylighting our creeks really improves their water quality and contributions to habitat .
So Ive shown you some of the first generation of retrofits .
Whats next ?
I think we have three challenges for the future .
The first is to plan retrofitting much more systemically at the metropolitan scale .
We need to be able to target which areas really should be re - greened .
Where should we be redeveloping ?
And where should we be encouraging re - inhabitation ?
These slides just show two images from a larger project that looked at trying to do that for Atlanta .
I led a team that was asked to imagine Atlanta 100 years from now .
And we chose to try to reverse sprawl through three simple moves  -  -  expensive , but simple .
One , in a hundred years , transit on all major rail and road corridors .
Two , in a hundred years , thousand foot buffers on all stream corridors .
Its a little extreme , but weve got a little water problem .
In a hundred years , subdivisions that simply end up too close to water or too far from transit wont be viable .
And so weve created the eco - acre transfer - to - transfer development rights to the transit corridors and allow the re - greening of those former subdivisions for food and energy production .
So the second challenge is to improve the architectural design quality of the retrofits .
And I close with this image of democracy in action : This is a protest thats happening on a retrofit in Silver Spring , Maryland on an Astroturf town green .
Now , retrofits are often accused of being examples of faux downtowns and instant urbanism , and not without reason ; you dont get much more phony than an Astroturf town green .
I have to say , these are very hybrid places .
They are new but trying to look old .
They have urban streetscapes , but suburban parking ratios .
Their populations are more diverse than typical suburbia , but theyre less diverse than cities .
And they are public places , but that are managed by private companies .
And just the surface appearance are often  -  -  like the Astroturf here  -  -  they make me wince .
So , you know , I mean Im glad that the urbanism is doing its job .
The fact that a protest is happening really does mean that the layout of the blocks , the streets and blocks , the putting in of public space , compromised as it may be , is still a really great thing .
But weve got to get the architecture better .
The final challenge is for all of you .
I want you to join the protest and start demanding more sustainable suburban places  -  -  more sustainable places , period .
But culturally , we tend to think that downtowns should be dynamic , and we expect that .
But we seem to have an expectation that the suburbs should forever remain frozen in whatever adolescent form they were first given birth to .
Its time to let them grow up , so I want you to all support the zoning changes , the road diets , the infrastructure improvements and the retrofits that are coming soon to a neighborhood near you .
Thank you .
Mitchell Besser : Mothers helping mothers fight HIV
In sub - Saharan Africa , HIV infections are more prevalent and doctors scarcer than anywhere else in the world . With a lack of medical professionals , Mitchell Besser enlisted the help of his patients to create mothers 2 mothers  -  -  an extraordinary network of HIV - positive women whose support for each other is changing and saving lives .
I want you to take a trip with me .
Picture yourself driving down a small road in Africa , and as you drive along , you look off to the side , and this is what you see : you see a field of graves .
And you stop , and you get out of your car and you take a picture .
And you go into the town , and you inquire ,  Whats going on here ? 
and people are initially reluctant to tell you .
And then someone says ,  These are the recent AIDS deaths in our community . 
HIV isnt like other medical conditions ; its stigmatizing .
People are reluctant to talk about it  -  -  theres a fear associated with it .
And Im going to talk about HIV today , about the deaths , about the stigma .
Its a medical story , but more than that , its a social story .
This map depicts the global distribution of HIV .
And as you can see , Africa has a disproportionate share of the infection .
There are 33 million people living with HIV in the world today .
Of these , two - thirds , 22 million are living in sub - Saharan Africa .
There are 1.4 million pregnant women in low -  and middle - income countries living with HIV and of these , 90 percent are in sub - Saharan Africa .
We talk about things in relative terms .
And Im going to talk about annual pregnancies and HIV - positive mothers .
The United States  -  -  a large country  -  -  each year , 7,000 mothers with HIV who give birth to a child .
But you go to Rwanda  -  -  a very small country  -  -  8,000 mothers with HIV who are pregnant .
And then you go to Baragwanath Hospital , outside of Johannesburg in South Africa , and 8,000 HIV - positive pregnant women giving birth  -  -  a hospital the same as a country .
And to realize that this is just the tip of an iceberg that when you compare everything here to South Africa , it just pales , because in South Africa , each year 300,000 mothers with HIV give birth to children .
So we talk about PMTCT , and we refer to PMTCT , prevention of mother to child transmission .
I think theres an assumption amongst most people in the public that if a mother is HIV - positive , shes going to infect her child .
The reality is really , very different .
In resource - rich countries , with all the tests and treatment we currently have , less than two percent of babies are born HIV - positive  -  -  98 percent of babies are born HIV - negative .
And yet , the reality in resource - poor countries , in the absence of tests and treatment , 40 percent  -  -  40 percent of children are infected  -  -  40 percent versus two percent  -  -  an enormous difference .
So these programs  -  -  and Im going to refer to PMTCT though my talk  -  -  these prevention programs , simply , theyre the tests and the drugs that we give to mothers to prevent them from infecting their babies , and also the medicines we give to mothers to keep them healthy and alive to raise their children .
So its the test a mother gets when she comes in .
Its the drugs she receives to protect the baby thats inside the uterus and during delivery .
Its the guidance she gets around infant feeding and safer sex .
Its an entire package of services , and it works .
So in the United States , since the advent of treatment in the middle of the 1990s , theres been an 80 - percent decline in the number of HIV - infected children .
Less than 100 babies are born with HIV each year in the United States and yet , still , over 400,000 children are born every year in the world today with HIV .
What does that mean ?
It means 1,100 children infected each day  -  -  1,100 children each day , infected with HIV .
And where do they come from ?
Well , less than one comes from the United States .
One , on average , comes from Europe .
100 come from Asia and the Pacific .
And each day , a thousand babies  -  -  a thousand babies are born each day with HIV in Africa .
So again , I look at the globe here and the disproportionate share of HIV in Africa .
And lets look at another map .
And here , again , we see Africa has a disproportionate share of the numbers of doctors .
That thin sliver you see here , thats Africa .
And its the same with nurses .
The truth is sub - Saharan Africa has 24 percent of the global disease burden and yet only three percent of the worlds health care workers .
That means doctors and nurses simply dont have the time to take care of patients .
A nurse in a busy clinic will see 50 to 100 patients in a day , which leaves her just minutes per patient  -  -  minutes per patient .
And so when we look at these PMTCT programs , what does it mean ?
Well , back in 2001 , when there was just a simple test and a single dose of a drug , a nurse , in the course of her few minutes with a patient , would have to counsel for the HIV test , perform the HIV test , explain the results , dispense a single dose of the drug , Nevirapine , explain how to take it , discuss infant feeding options , reinforce infant feeding , and test the baby  -  -  in minutes .
Well , fortunately since 2001 , weve got new treatments , new tests , and were far more successful , but we dont have any more nurses .
And so these are the tests a nurse now has to do in those same few minutes .
Its not possible  -  -  it doesnt work .
And so we need to find better ways of providing care .
This is a picture of a maternal health clinic in Africa  -  -  mothers coming , pregnant and with their babies .
These women are here for care , but we know that just doing a test , just giving someone a drug , its not enough .
Meds dont equal medical care .
Doctors and nurses , frankly , dont have the time or skills to tell people what to do in ways they understand .
Im a doctor  -  -  I tell people things to do , and I expect them to follow my guidance  -  -  because Im a doctor ; I went to Harvard  -  -  but the reality is , if I tell a patient ,  You should have safer sex .
You should always use a condom ,  and yet , in her relationship , shes not empowered  -  -  whats going to happen ?
If I tell her to take her medicines every day and yet , no one in the household knows about her illness , so its just not going to work .
And so we need to do more , we need to do it differently , we need to do it in ways that are affordable and accessible and can be taken to scale , which means it can be done everywhere .
So , I want to tell you a story  -  -  I want to take you on a little trip .
Imagine yourself , if you can , youre a young woman in Africa , youre going to the hospital or clinic .
You go in for a test and you find out that youre pregnant , and youre delighted .
And then they give you another test and they tell you youre HIV - positive , and youre devastated .
And the nurse takes you into a room , and she tells you about the tests and HIV and the medicines you can take and how to take care of yourself and your baby , and you hear none of it .
All youre hearing is ,  Im going to die , and my baby is going to die . 
And then youre out on the street , and you dont know where to go .
And you dont know who you can talk to , because the truth is , HIV is so stigmatizing that if you partner , your family , anyone in your home , youre likely to be thrown out without any means of support .
And this  -  -  this is the face and story of HIV in Africa today .
But were here to talk about possible solutions and some good news .
And I want to change the story a little bit .
Take the same mother , and the nurse , after she gives her her test , takes her to a room .
The door opens and theres a room full of mothers , mothers with babies , and theyre sitting , and theyre talking , theyre listening .
Theyre drinking tea , theyre having sandwiches .
And she goes inside , and woman comes up to her and says ,  Welcome to mothers 2 mothers .
Have a seat . Youre safe here .
Were all HIV - positive .
Youre going to be okay . Youre going to live .
Your baby is going to be HIV - negative . 
We view mothers as a communitys single greatest resource .
Mothers take care of the children , take care of the home .
So often the men are gone .
Theyre working , or theyre not part of the household .
Our organization , mothers 2 mothers , enlists women with HIV as care providers .
We bring mothers who have HIV , whove been through these PMTCT programs in the very facilities , to come back and work side by side with doctors and nurses as part of the health care team .
These mothers , we call them mentor mothers , are able to engage women who , just like themselves , pregnant with babies , have found out about being HIV - positive , who need support and education .
And they support them around the diagnosis and educate them about how to take their medicines , how to take care of themselves , how to take care of their babies .
Consider : if you needed surgery , you would want the best possible technical surgeon , right ?
But if you wanted to understand what that surgery would do to your life , youd like to engage someone , someone whos had the procedure .
Patients are experts on their own experience , and they can share that experience with others .
This is the medical care that goes beyond just medicines .
So the mothers who work for us , they come from the communities in which they work .
Theyre hired  -  -  theyre paid as professional members of the health care teams , just like doctors and nurses .
And we open bank accounts for them and theyre paid directly into the accounts , because their moneys protected ; the men cant take it away from them .
They go through two to three weeks of rigorous curriculum - based education , training .
Now , doctors and nurses  -  -  they too get trained .
But so often , they only get trained once , so theyre not aware of new medicines , new guidelines as they come out .
Our mentor mothers get trained every single year and retrained .
And so doctors and nurses  -  -  they look up to them as experts .
Imagine that : a woman , a former patient , being able to educate her doctor for the first time and educate the other patients that shes taking care of .
Our organization has three goals .
The first , to prevent mother - to - child transmission .
The second : keep mothers healthy , keep mothers alive , keep the children alive  -  -  no more orphans .
And the third , and maybe the most grand , is to find ways to empower women , enable them to fight the stigma and to live positive and productive lives with HIV .
So how do we do it ?
Well , maybe the most important engagement is the one - to - one , seeing patients one - to - one , educating them , supporting them , explaining how they can take care of themselves .
We go beyond that ; we try to bring in the husbands , the partners .
In Africa , its very , very hard to engage men .
Men are not frequently part of pregnancy care .
But in Rwanda , in one country , theyve got a policy that a woman cant come for care unless she brings the father of the baby with her  -  -  thats the rule .
And so the father and the mother , together , go through the counseling and the testing .
The father and the mother , together , they get the results .
And this is so important in breaking through the stigma .
Disclosure is so central to prevention .
How do you have safer sex , how do you use a condom regularly if there hasnt been disclosure ?
Disclosure is so important to treatment , because again , people need the support of family members and friends to take their medicines regularly .
We also work in groups .
Now the groups , its not like me lecturing , but what happens is women , they come together  -  -  under the support and guidance of our mentor mothers  -  -  they come together , and they share their personal experiences .
And its through the sharing that people get tactics of how to take care of themselves , how to disclose how to take medicines .
And then theres the community outreach , engaging women in their communities .
If we can change the way households believe and think , we can change the way communities believe and think .
And if we can change enough communities , we can change national attitudes .
We can change national attitudes to women and national attitudes to HIV .
The hardest barrier really is around stigma reduction .
We have the medicines , we have the tests , but how do you reduce the stigma ?
And its important about disclosure .
So , a couple years ago , one of the mentor mothers came back , and she told me a story .
She had been asked by one of the clients to go to the home of the client , because the client wanted to tell the mother and her brothers and sisters about her HIV status , and she was afraid to go by herself .
And so the mentor mother went along with .
And the patient walked into the house and said to her mother and siblings ,  I have something to tell you . Im HIV - positive . 
And everybody was quiet .
And then her oldest brother stood up and said ,  I too have something to tell you .
Im HIV - positive .
Ive been afraid to tell everybody . 
And then this older sister stood up and said ,  I too am living with the virus , and Ive been ashamed . 
And then her younger brother stood up and said ,  Im also positive .
I thought you were going to throw me out of the family . 
And you see where this is going .
The last sister stood up and said ,  Im also positive .
I thought you were going to hate me . 
And there they were , all of them together for the first time being able to share this experience for the first time and to support each other for the first time .
Female Women come to us , and they are crying and scared .
I tell them my story , that I am HIV - positive , but my child is HIV - negative .
I tell them ,  You are going to make it , and you will raise a healthy baby . 
I am proof that there is hope .
Mitchell Besser : Remember the images I showed you of how few doctors and nurses there are in Africa .
And it is a crisis in health care systems .
Even as we have more tests and more drugs , we cant reach people ; we dont have enough providers .
So we talk in terms of what we call task - shifting .
Task - shifting is traditionally when you take health care services from one provider and have another provider do it .
Typically , its a doctor giving a job to a nurse .
And the issue in Africa is that there are fewer nurses , really than doctors , and so we need to find new paradigm for health care .
How do you build a better health care system ?
Weve chosen to redefine the health care system as a doctor , a nurse and a mentor mother .
And so what nurses do is that they ask the mentor mothers to explain how to take the drugs , the side effects .
They delegate education about infant feeding , family planning , safer sex , actions that nurses simple just dont have time for .
So we go back to the prevention of mother to child transmission .
The world is increasingly seeing these programs as the bridge to comprehensive maternal and child health .
And our organization helps women across that bridge .
The care doesnt stop when the babys born  -  -  we deal with the ongoing health of the mother and baby , ensuring that they live healthy , successful lives .
Our organization works on three levels .
The first , at the patient level  -  -  mothers and babies keeping babies from getting HIV , keeping mothers healthy to raise them .
The second , communities  -  -  empowering women .
They become leaders within their communities .
They change the way communities think  -  -  we need to change attitudes to HIV .
We need to change attitudes to women in Africa .
We have to do that .
And then rework the level of the health care systems , building stronger health care systems .
Our health care systems are broken .
Theyre not going to work the way theyre currently designed .
And so doctors and nurses who need to try to change peoples behaviors dont have the skills , dont have the time  -  -  our mentor mothers do .
And so in redefining the health care teams by bringing the mentor mothers in , we can do that .
I started the program in Capetown , South Africa back in 2001 .
It was at that point , just the spark of an idea .
Referencing Steven Johnsons very lovely speech yesterday on where ideas come from , I was in the shower at the time  -  -  I was alone .
The program is now working in nine countries , we have 670 program sites , were seeing about 230,000 women every month , were employing 1,600 mentor mothers , and last year , they enrolled 300,000 HIV - positive pregnant women and mothers .
That is 20 percent of the global HIV - positive pregnant women  -  -  20 percent of the world .
Whats extraordinary is how simple the premise is .
Mothers with HIV caring for mothers with HIV .
Past patients taking care of present patients .
And empowerment through employment  -  -  reducing stigma .
Female There is hope , hope that one day we shall win this fight against HIV and AIDS .
Each person must know their HIV status .
Those who are HIV - negative must know how to stay negative .
Those who are HIV - infected must know how to take care of themselves .
HIV - positive pregnant women must get PMTCT services in order to have HIV - negative babies .
All of this is possible , if we each contribute to this fight .
MB : Simple solutions to complex problems .
Mothers caring for mothers .
Its transformational .
Thank you .
Jenna McCarthy : What you dont know about marriage
In this funny , casual talk from TEDx , writer Jenna McCarthy shares surprising research on how marriages really work . One tip : Do not try to win an Oscar for best actress . 
Every year in the United States alone , 2,077,000 couples make a legal and spiritual decision to spend the rest of their lives together ...
and not to have sex with anyone else , ever .
He buys a ring , she buys a dress .
They go shopping for all sorts of things .
She takes him to Arthur Murray for ballroom dancing lessons .
And the big day comes .
And theyll stand before God and family and some guy her dad once did business with , and theyll vow that nothing , not abject poverty , not life - threatening illness , not complete and utter misery will ever put the tiniest damper on their eternal love and devotion .
These optimistic young bastards promise to honor and cherish each other through hot flashes and mid - life crises and a cumulative 50 - lb . weight gain , until that far - off day when one of them is finally able to rest in peace .
You know , because they cant hear the snoring anymore .
And then theyll get stupid drunk and smash cake in each others faces and do the  Macarena ,  and well be there showering them with towels and toasters and drinking their free booze and throwing birdseed at them every single time  -  -  even though we know , statistically , half of them will be divorced within a decade .
Of course , the other half wont , right ?
Theyll keep forgetting anniversaries and arguing about where to spend holidays and debating which way the toilet paper should come off of the roll .
And some of them will even still be enjoying each others company when neither of them can chew solid food anymore .
And researchers want to know why .
I mean , look , it doesnt take a double - blind , placebo - controlled study to figure out what makes a marriage not work .
Disrespect , boredom , too much time on Facebook , having sex with other people .
But you can have the exact opposite of all of those things  -  -  respect , excitement , a broken Internet connection , mind - numbing monogamy  -  -  and the thing still can go to hell in a hand basket .
So whats going on when it doesnt ?
What do the folks who make it all the way to side - by - side burial plots have in common ?
What are they doing right ?
What can we learn from them ?
And if youre still happily sleeping solo , why should you stop what youre doing and make it your lifes work to find that one special person that you can annoy for the rest of your life ?
Well researchers spend billions of your tax dollars trying to figure that out .
They stalk blissful couples and they study their every move and mannerism .
And they try to pinpoint what it is that sets them apart from their miserable neighbors and friends .
And it turns out , the success stories share a few similarities , actually , beyond they dont have sex with other people .
For instance , in the happiest marriages , the wife is thinner and better looking than the husband .
Obvious , right .
Its obvious that this leads to marital bliss because , women , we care a great deal about being thin and good looking , whereas men mostly care about sex ...
ideally with women who are thinner and better looking than they are .
The beauty of this research though is that no one is suggesting that women have to be thin to be happy ; we just have to be thinner than our partners .
So instead of all that laborious dieting and exercising , we just need to wait for them to get fat , maybe bake a few pies .
This is good information to have , and its not that complicated .
Research also suggests that the happiest couples are the ones that focus on the positives .
For example , the happy wife .
Instead of pointing out her husbands growing gut or suggesting he go for a run , she might say ,  Wow , honey , thank you for going out of your way to make me relatively thinner . 
These are couples who can find good in any situation .
 Yeah , it was devastating when we lost everything in that fire , but its kind of nice sleeping out here under the stars , and its a good thing youve got all that body fat to keep us warm . 
One of my favorite studies found that the more willing a husband is to do house work , the more attractive his wife will find him .
Because we needed a study to tell us this .
But heres whats going on here .
The more attractive she finds him , the more sex they have ; the more sex they have , the nicer he is to her ; the nicer he is to her , the less she nags him about leaving wet towels on the bed  -  -  and ultimately , they live happily ever after .
In other words , men , you might want to pick it up a notch in the domestic department .
Heres an interesting one .
One study found that people who smile in childhood photographs are less likely to get a divorce .
This is an actual study , and let me clarify .
The researchers were not looking at documented self - reports of childhood happiness or even studying old journals .
The data were based entirely on whether people looked happy in these early pictures .
Now I dont know how old all of you are , but when I was a kid , your parents took pictures with a special kind of camera that held something called film , and , by God , film was expensive .
They didnt take 300 shots of you in that rapid - fire digital video mode and then pick out the nicest , smileyest one for the Christmas card .
Oh no .
They dressed you up , they lined you up , and you smiled for the fucking camera like they told you to or you could kiss your birthday party goodbye .
But still , I have a huge pile of fake happy childhood pictures and Im glad they make me less likely than some people to get a divorce .
So what else can you do to safeguard your marriage ?
Do not win an Oscar for best actress .
Im serious .
Bettie Davis , Joan Crawford , Hallie Berry , Hillary Swank , Sandra Bullock , Reese Witherspoon , all of them single soon after taking home that statue .
They actually call it the Oscar curse .
It is the marriage kiss of death and something that should be avoided .
And its not just successfully starring in films thats dangerous .
It turns out , merely watching a romantic comedy causes relationship satisfaction to plummet .
Apparently , the bitter realization that maybe it could happen to us , but it obviously hasnt and it probably never will , makes our lives seem unbearably grim in comparison .
And theoretically , I suppose if we opt for a film where someone gets brutally murdered or dies in a fiery car crash , we are more likely to walk out of that theater feeling like weve got it pretty good .
Drinking alcohol , it seems , is bad for your marriage .
Yeah .
I cant tell you anymore about that one because I stopped reading it at the headline .
But heres a scary one : Divorce is contagious .
Thats right  -  -  when you have a close couple friend split up , it increases your chances of getting a divorce by 75 percent .
Now I have to say , I dont get this one at all .
My husband and I have watched quite a few friends divide their assets and then struggle with being our age and single in an age of sexting and Viagra and eHarmony .
And Im thinking theyve done more for my marriage than a lifetime of therapy ever could .
So now you may be wondering , why does anyone get married ever ?
Well the U.S . federal government counts more than a thousand legal benefits to being someones spouse  -  -  a list that includes visitation rights in jail , but hopefully youll never need that one .
But beyond the profound federal perks , married people make more money .
Were healthier , physically and emotionally .
We produce happier , more stable and more successful kids .
We have more sex than our supposedly swinging single friends  -  -  believe it or not .
We even live longer , which is a pretty compelling argument for marrying someone you like a lot in the first place .
Now if youre not currently experiencing the joy of the joint tax return , I cant tell you how to find a chore - loving person of the approximately ideal size and attractiveness who prefers horror movies and doesnt have a lot of friends hovering on the brink of divorce , but I can only encourage you to try , because the benefits , as Ive pointed out , are significant .
The bottom line is , whether youre in it or youre searching for it , I believe marriage is an institution worth pursuing and protecting .
So I hope youll use the information Ive given you today to weigh your personal strengths against your own risk factors .
For instance , in my marriage , Id say Im doing okay .
One the one hand , I have a husband whos annoyingly lean and incredibly handsome .
So Im obviously going to need fatten him up .
And like I said , we have those divorced friends who may secretly or subconsciously be trying to break us up .
So we have to keep an eye on that .
And we do like a cocktail or two .
On the other hand , I have the fake happy picture thing .
And also , my husband does a lot around the house , and would happily never see another romantic comedy as long as he lives .
So Ive got all those things going for me .
But just in case , I plan to work extra hard to not win an Oscar anytime soon .
And for the good of your relationships , I would encourage you to do the same .
Ill see you at the bar .
John Maeda : How art , technology and design inform creative leaders
John Maeda , former President of the Rhode Island School of Design , delivers a funny and charming talk that spans a lifetime of work in art , design and technology , concluding with a picture of creative leadership in the future . Watch for demos of Maedas earliest work  -  -  and even a computer made of people .
I have to say that Im very glad to be here .
I understand we have over 80 countries here , so thats a whole new paradigm for me to speak to all of these countries .
In each country , Im sure you have this thing called the parent - teacher conference .
Do you know about the parent - teacher conference ?
Not the ones for your kids , but the one you had as a child , where your parents come to school and your teacher talks to your parents , and its a little bit awkward .
Well , I remember in third grade , I had this moment where my father , who never takes off from work , hes a classical blue collar , a working - class immigrant person , going to school to see his son , how hes doing , and the teacher said to him , he said ,  You know , John is good at math and art . 
And he kind of nodded , you know ?
The next day I saw him talking to a customer at our tofu store , and he said ,  You know , Johns good at math . 
And that always stuck with me all my life .
Why didnt Dad say art ? Why wasnt it okay ?
Why ? It became a question my entire life , and thats all right , because being good at math meant he bought me a computer , and some of you remember this computer , this was my first computer .
Who had an Apple II ? Apple II users , very cool .
As you remember , the Apple II did nothing at all .
Youd plug it in , youd type in it and green text would come out .
It would say youre wrong most of the time .
That was the computer we knew .
That computer is a computer that I learned about going to MIT , my fathers dream . And at MIT , however , I learned about the computer at all levels , and after , I went to art school to get away from computers , and I began to think about the computer as more of a spiritual space of thinking .
And I was influenced by performance art  -  -  so this is 20 years ago . I made a computer out of people .
It was called the Human Powered Computer Experiment .
I have a power manager , mouse driver , memory , etc . , and I built this in Kyoto , the old capital of Japan .
Its a room broken in two halves .
Ive turned the computer on , and these assistants are placing a giant floppy disk built out of cardboard , and its put into the computer .
And the floppy disk drive person wears it .
She finds the first sector on the disk , and takes data off the disk and passes it off to , of course , the bus .
So the bus diligently carries the data into the computer to the memory , to the CPU , the VRAM , etc . , and its an actual working computer . Thats a bus , really .
And it looks kind of fast . Thats a mouse driver , where its XY .
It looks like its happening kind of quickly , but its actually a very slow computer , and when I realized how slow this computer was compared to how fast a computer is , it made me wonder about computers and technology in general .
And so Im going to talk today about four things , really .
The first three things are about how Ive been curious about technology , design and art , and how they intersect , how they overlap , and also a topic that Ive taken on since four years ago I became the President of Rhode Island School of Design : leadership .
And Ill talk about how Ive looked to combine these four areas into a kind of a synthesis , a kind of experiment .
So starting from technology , technology is a wonderful thing .
When that Apple II came out , it really could do nothing .
It could show text and after we waited a bit , we had these things called images .
Remember when images were first possible with a computer , those gorgeous , full - color images ?
And then after a few years , we got CD - quality sound .
It was incredible . You could listen to sound on the computer .
And then movies , via CD - ROM . It was amazing .
Remember that excitement ?
And then the browser appeared . The browser was great , but the browser was very primitive , very narrow bandwidth .
Text first , then images , we waited , CD - quality sound over the Net , then movies over the Internet . Kind of incredible .
And then the mobile phone occurred , text , images , audio , video . And now we have IPhone , IPad , Android , with text , video , audio , etc .
You see this little pattern here ?
Were kind of stuck in a loop , perhaps , and this sense of possibility from computing is something Ive been questioning for the last 10 or so years , and have looked to design , as we understand most things , and to understand design with our technology has been a passion of mine .
And I have a small experiment to give you a quick design lesson .
Designers talk about the relationship between form and content , content and form . Now what does that mean ?
Well , content is the word up there : fear .
Its a four - letter word . Its a kind of a bad feeling word , fear .
Fear is set in Light Helvetica , so its not too stressful , and if you set it in Ultra Light Helvetica , its like ,  Oh , fear , who cares ?  Right ?
You take the same Ultra Light Helvetica and make it big , and like , whoa , that hurts . Fear .
So you can see how you change the scale , you change the form . Content is the same , but you feel differently .
You change the typeface to , like , this typeface , and its kind of funny . Its like pirate typeface , like Captain Jack Sparrow typeface . Arr ! Fear !
Like , aww , thats not fearful . Thats actually funny .
Or fear like this , kind of a nightclub typeface .
Like , we gotta go to Fear .
Its , like , amazing , right ?
It just changes the same content .
Or you make it  -  -  The letters are separated apart , theyre huddled together like on the deck of the Titanic , and you feel sorry for the letters , like , I feel the fear .
You feel for them .
Or you change the typeface to something like this .
Its very classy . Its like that expensive restaurant , Fear .
I can never get in there .
Its just amazing , Fear . But thats form , content .
If you just change one letter in that content , you get a much better word , much better content : free .
 Free  is a great word . You can serve it almost any way .
Free bold feels like Mandela free .
Its like , yes , I can be free .
Free even light feels kind of like , ah , I can breathe in free .
It feels great . Or even free spread out , its like , ah , I can breathe in free , so easily .
And I can add in a blue gradient and a dove , and I have , like , Don Draper free .
So you see that  -  -  form , content , design , it works that way .
Its a powerful thing . Its like magic , almost , like the magicians weve seen at TED . Its magic .
Design does that .
And Ive been curious about how design and technology intersect , and Im going to show you some old work I never really show anymore , to give you a sense of what I used to do .
So  -  -  yeah .
So I made a lot of work in the 90s .
This was a square that responds to sound .
People ask me why I made that . Its not clear .
But I thought itd be neat for the square to respond to me , and my kids were small then , and my kids would play with these things , like ,  Aaah ,  you know , they would say ,  Daddy , aaah , aaah .  You know , like that .
Wed go to a computer store , and theyd do the same thing .
And theyd say ,  Daddy , why doesnt the computer respond to sound ? 
And it was really at the time I was wondering why doesnt the computer respond to sound ?
So I made this as a kind of an experiment at the time .
And then I spent a lot of time in the space of interactive graphics and things like this , and I stopped doing it because my students at MIT got so much better than myself , so I had to hang up my mouse .
But in 96 , I made my last piece . It was in black and white , monochrome , fully monochrome , all in integer mathematics .
Its called  Tap , Type , Write . 
Its paying a tribute to the wonderful typewriter that my mother used to type on all the time as a legal secretary .
It has 10 variations .
Theres a shift .
Ten variations . This is , like , spin the letter around .
This is , like , a ring of letters .
This is 20 years old , so its kind of a  -  -  Lets see , this is — I love the French film  The Red Balloon . 
Great movie , right ? I love that movie . So , this is sort of like a play on that .
Its peaceful , like that .
Ill show this last one . This is about balance , you know .
Its kind of stressful typing out , so if you type on this keyboard , you can , like , balance it out .
If you hit G , lifes okay , so I always say ,  Hit G , and its going to be all right .
Thank you .
Thank you .
So that was 20 years ago , and I was always on the periphery of art .
By being President of RISD Ive gone deep into art , and art is a wonderful thing , fine art , pure art .
You know , when people say ,  I dont get art .
I dont get it at all .  That means art is working , you know ?
Its like , art is supposed to be enigmatic , so when you say , like ,  I dont get it ,  like , oh , thats great .
Art does that , because art is about asking questions , questions that may not be answerable .
At RISD , we have this amazing facility called the Edna Lawrence Nature Lab . It has 80,000 samples of animal , bone , mineral , plants .
You know , in Rhode Island , if an animal gets hit on the road , they call us up and we pick it up and stuff it .
And why do we have this facility ?
Because at RISD , you have to look at the actual animal , the object , to understand its volume , to perceive it .
At RISD , youre not allowed to draw from an image .
And many people ask me , John , couldnt you just digitize all this ? Make it all digital ? Wouldnt it be better ?
And I often say , well , theres something good to how things used to be done . Theres something very different about it , something we should figure out what is good about how we did it , even in this new era .
And I have a good friend , hes a new media artist named Tota Hasegawa . Hes based in London , no , actually its in Tokyo , but when he was based in London , he had a game with his wife . He would go to antique shops , and the game was as such : When we look at an antique we want , well ask the shopkeeper for the story behind the antique , and if its a good story , well buy it .
So theyd go to an antique shop , and theyd look at this cup , and theyd say ,  Tell us about this cup . 
And the shopkeeper would say ,  Its old . 
 Tell us more .   Oh , its really old . 
And he saw , over and over , the antiques value was all about it being old .
And as a new media artist , he reflected , and said , you know , Ive spent my whole career making new media art .
People say ,  Wow , your art , what is it ?  Its new media .
And he realized , it isnt about old or new .
Its about something in between .
It isnt about  old ,  the dirt ,  new ,  the cloud . Its about what is good .
A combination of the cloud and the dirt is where the action is at .
You see it in all interesting art today , in all interesting businesses today . How we combine those two together to make good is very interesting .
So art makes questions , and leadership is something that is asking a lot of questions .
We arent functioning so easily anymore .
We arent a simple authoritarian regime anymore .
As an example of authoritarianism , I was in Russia one time traveling in St . Petersburg , at a national monument , and I saw this sign that says ,  Do Not Walk On The Grass ,  and I thought , oh , I mean , I speak English , and youre trying to single me out . Thats not fair .
But I found a sign for Russian - speaking people , and it was the best sign ever to say no .
It was like ,  No swimming , no hiking , no anything . 
My favorite ones are  no plants .  Why would you bring a plant to a national monument ? Im not sure .
And also  no love . 
So that is authoritarianism .
And what is that , structurally ?
Its a hierarchy . We all know that a hierarchy is how we run many systems today , but as we know , its been disrupted .
It is now a network instead of a perfect tree .
Its a heterarchy instead of a hierarchy . And thats kind of awkward .
And so today , leaders are faced with how to lead differently , I believe .
This is work I did with my colleague Becky Bermont on creative leadership . What can we learn from artists and designers for how to lead ?
Because in many senses , a regular leader loves to avoid mistakes .
Someone whos creative actually loves to learn from mistakes .
A traditional leader is always wanting to be right , whereas a creative leader hopes to be right .
And this frame is important today , in this complex , ambiguous space , and artists and designers have a lot to teach us , I believe .
And I had a show in London recently where my friends invited me to come to London for four days to sit in a sandbox , and I said great .
And so I sat in a sandbox for four days straight , six hours every day , six - minute appointments with anyone in London , and that was really bad .
But I would listen to people , hear their issues , draw in the sand , try to figure things out , and it was kind of hard to figure out what I was doing .
You know ? Its all these one - on - one meetings for like four days .
And it felt kind of like being president , actually .
I was like ,  Oh , this my job . President . I do a lot of meetings , you know ? 
And by the end of the experience , I realized why I was doing this .
Its because leaders , what we do is we connect improbable connections and hope something will happen , and in that room I found so many connections between people across all of London , and so leadership , connecting people , is the great question today .
Whether youre in the hierarchy or the heterarchy , its a wonderful design challenge .
And one thing Ive been doing is doing some research on systems that can combine technology and leadership with an art and design perspective .
Let me show you something I havent shown anywhere , actually .
So what this is , is a kind of a sketch , an application sketch I wrote in Python . You know how theres Photoshop ?
This is called Powershop , and the way it works is imagine an organization . You know , the CEO isnt ever at the top . The CEOs at the center of the organization .
There may be different subdivisions in the organization , and you might want to look into different areas . For instance , green are areas doing well , red are areas doing poorly .
You know , how do you , as the leader , scan , connect , make things happen ? So for instance , you might open up a distribution here and find the different subdivisions in there , and know that you know someone in Eco , over here , and these people here are in Eco , the people you might engage with as CEO , people going across the hierarchy .
And part of the challenge of the CEO is to find connections across areas , and so you might look in R and D , and here you see one person who crosses the two areas of interest , and its a person important to engage .
So you might want to , for instance , get a heads - up display on how youre interacting with them .
How many coffees do you have ?
How often are you calling them , emailing them ?
What is the tenor of their email ? How is it working out ?
Leaders might be able to use these systems to better regulate how they work inside the heterarchy .
You can also imagine using technology like from Luminoso , the guys from Cambridge who were looking at deep text analysis . What is the tenor of your communications ?
So these kind of systems , I believe , are important .
Theyre targeted social media systems around leaders .
And I believe that this kind of perspective will only begin to grow as more leaders enter the space of art and design , because art and design lets you think like this , find different systems like this , and Ive just begun thinking like this , so Im glad to share that with you .
So in closing , I want to thank all of you for your attention . Thanks very much .
Emiliano Salinas : A civil response to violence
In this passionate talk thats already caused a sensation in Mexico , Emiliano Salinas , son of former president Carlos Salinas de Gortari , confronts the current climate of violence in Mexico  -  -  or rather , how Mexican society responds to it . He calls on ordinary citizens to move from denial and fear to peaceful , community - based action .
My name is Emiliano Salinas and Im going to talk about the role we members of society play in the violent atmosphere this country is living in right now .
I was born in 1976 .
I grew up in a traditional Mexican family .
As a child , I had a pretty normal life : I would go to school , play with my friends and cousins .
But then my father became President of Mexico and my life changed .
What Im about to say , at least some of what Im about to say , will cause controversy .
Firstly , because Im the one whos going to say it .
And secondly , because what Im going to say is true , and it will make a lot of people nervous because its something we dont want to hear .
But its imperative that we listen because its undeniable and definitive .
It will also make members of criminal organizations nervous for the same reasons .
Im going to talk about the role we members of society play in this phenomenon , and about four different response levels we citizens have against violence .
I know many will find it difficult to separate the fact that Im Carlos Salinas de Gortaris son from the fact that Im a citizen concerned about the countrys current situation .
Dont worry .
Its not necessary for understanding the importance of what Im going to say .
I think we have a problem in Mexico .
We have a big problem .
I think theres consensus on this .
No one argues  -  -  we all agree theres a problem .
What we dont agree on is what the problem actually is .
Is it the Zetas ? The drug traffickers ? The government ?
Corruption ? Poverty ? Or is it something else ?
I think none of these is the problem .
I dont mean they dont deserve attention .
But we wont be able to take care of any of those things if we dont solve the real problem we have in Mexico first .
The real problem we have is most of us Mexicans , we believe we are victims of our circumstances .
We are a country of victims .
Historically , weve always acted as victims of something or somebody .
We were victims of the Spaniards .
Then we were victims of the French .
Then we were victims of Don Porfirio .
Then we were victims of the PRI .
Even of Salinas .
And of El Peje .
And now of the Zetas and the traffickers and the criminals and the kidnappers ...
Hold on ! Wait a minute !
What if none of these things is the problem ?
The problem is not the things we feel victims of .
The problem is that we play the role of victims .
We need to open our eyes and see that we are not victims .
If only we stopped feeling like victims , if we stopped acting as victims , our country would change so much !
Im going to talk about how to go from a society that acts as a victim of circumstances to a responsible , involved society that takes the future of its country in its own hands .
Im going to talk about four different levels of civil response against violence , from weakest to strongest .
The first level , the weakest level of civil response against violence , is denial and apathy .
Today , much of Mexican society is in denial of the situation were going through .
We want to go on with our daily life even though we are not living under normal circumstances .
Daily life in our country is , to say the least , under extraordinary , exceptional circumstances .
Its like someone who has a serious illness and pretends its the flu and it will just go away .
We want to pretend that Mexico has the flu .
But it doesnt .
Mexico has cancer .
And if we dont do something about it , the cancer will end up killing it .
We need to move Mexican society from denial and apathy to the next level of citizen response , which is , effectively , recognition .
And that recognition will sow fear  -  -  recognizing the seriousness of the situation .
But , fear is better than apathy because fear makes us do something .
Many people in Mexico are afraid today .
Were very afraid .
And were acting out of that fear .
And let me tell you what the problem is with acting out of fear  -  -  and this is the second level of civil response : fear .
Lets think about Mexican streets : theyre unsafe because of violence , so people stay at home .
Does that make streets more or less safe ?
Less safe !
So streets become more desolate and unsafe , so we stay home more  -  -  which makes streets even more desolate and unsafe , and we stay home even more .
This vicious circle ends up with the whole population stuck inside their houses , scared to death  -  -  even more afraid than when we were out on the streets .
We need to confront this fear .
We need to move Mexican society , the members of society who are at this level , to the next level , which is action .
We need to face our fears and take back our streets , our cities , our neighborhoods .
For many people , acting involves courage .
We go from fear to courage .
They say ,  I cant take it anymore .
Lets do something about it . 
Recently  -  -  this is a sensitive figure  -  -  35 public lynchings have been recorded so far in 2010 in Mexico .
Usually its one or two a year .
Now were experiencing one every week .
This shows that society is desperate and its taking the law into its own hands .
Unfortunately , violent action  -  -  though action is better than no action  -  -  but taking part in it only disguises violence .
If Im violent with you and you respond with violence , you become part of the violence and you just disguise my violence .
So civil action is vital , but its also vital to take people who are at the level of courage and violent action to the next level , which is non - violent action .
Its pacific , coordinated civil action , which doesnt mean passive action .
It means its determined and effective , but not violent .
There are examples of this kind of action in Mexico .
Two years ago , in Galena City , Chihuahua , a member of the community was kidnapped , Eric Le Barón .
His brothers , Benjamín and Julián , got together with the rest of the community to think of the best course of action : to pay the ransom , to take up arms and go after the kidnappers or to ask the government for help .
In the end , Benjamín and Julián decided the best thing they could do was to organize the community and act together .
So what did they do ?
They mobilized the whole community of Le Barón to go to Chihuahua , where they organized a sit - in in the central park of the city .
They sent a message to the kidnappers :  If you want your ransom come and get it .
Well be waiting for you right here . 
They stayed there .
Seven days later , Eric was set free and was able to return home .
This is an example of what an organized society can do , a society that acts .
Of course , criminals can respond .
And in this case , they did .
On July 7th , 2009 , Benjamín Le Barón was murdered .
But Julián Le Barón keeps working and he has been mobilizing communities in Chihuahua for over a year .
And for over a year he has known that a price has been put on his head .
But he keeps fighting .
He keeps organizing .
He keeps mobilizing .
These heroic acts are present all over the country .
With a thousand Juliáns working together , Mexico would be a very different country .
And theyre out there !
They just have to raise their hands .
I was born in Mexico , I grew up in Mexico and along the way , I learned to love Mexico .
I think anyone who has stepped foot on this land  -  -  not to mention all Mexican people  -  -  will agree that its not difficult to love Mexico .
Ive traveled a lot and nowhere else have I found the passion Mexicans have .
That devotion we feel for the national football team .
That devotion we show in helping victims of disasters , such as the earthquake in 1985 or this years floods .
The passion with which weve been singing the national anthem since we were kids .
When we thought Masiosare was the strange enemy , and we sang , with a childlike heart ,  a soldier in each son . 
I think the biggest insult , the worst way you can offend a Mexican is to insult their mother .
A mother is the most sacred thing in life .
Mexico is our mother and today she cries out for her children .
We are going through the darkest moment in our recent history .
Our mother , Mexico , is being violated before our very eyes .
What are we going to do ?
Masiosare , the strange enemy , is here .
Where is the soldier in each son ?
Mahatma Gandhi , one of the greatest civil fighters of all time , said ,  Be the change you wish to see in the world . 
Today in Mexico were asking for Gandhis .
We need Ghandis .
We need men and women who love Mexico and who are willing to take action .
This is a call for every true Mexican to join this initiative .
This is a call so that every single thing we love about Mexico  -  -  the festivals , the markets , the restaurants , the cantinas , the tequila , the mariachis , the serenades , the posadas , El Grito , the Day of the Dead , San Miguel , the joy , the passion for life , the fight and everything it means to be Mexican  -  -  doesnt disappear from this world .
Were facing a very powerful opponent .
But we are many more .
They can take a mans life .
Anyone can kill me , or you , or you .
But no one can kill the spirit of true Mexicans .
The battle is won , but we still have to fight it .
2000 years ago , the Roman poet Juvenal said something that today echoes in the heart of every true Mexican .
He said ,  Count it the greatest sin to prefer life to honor , and for the sake of living to lose what makes life worth living . 
Thank you .
Evelyn Glennie : How to truly listen
In this soaring demonstration , deaf percussionist Evelyn Glennie illustrates how listening to music involves much more than simply letting sound waves hit your eardrums .
Im not quite sure whether I really want to see a snare drum at nine oclock or so in the morning .
But anyway , its just great to see such a full theater , and really I must thank Herbie Hancock and his colleagues for such a great presentation .
One of the interesting things , of course , is the combination of that raw hand on the instrument and technology , and of course what he said about listening to our young people .
Of course , my job is all about listening , and my aim , really , is to teach the world to listen .
Thats my only real aim in life .
And it sounds quite simple , but actually its quite a big , big job .
Because you know , when you look at a piece of music  -  -  for example , if I just open my little motorbike bag  -  -  we have here , hopefully , a piece of music that is full of little black dots on the page .
And , you know , we open it up and I read the music .
So technically , I can actually read this .
I will follow the instructions , the tempo markings , the dynamics .
I will do exactly as Im told .
And so therefore , because time is short , if I just play you literally the first maybe two lines or so . Its very straightforward .
Theres nothing too difficult about the piece .
But here Im being told that the piece of music is very quick .
Im being told where to play on the drum .
Im being told which part of the stick to use .
And Im being told the dynamic .
And Im also being told that the drum is without snares .
Snares on , snares off .
So therefore , if I translate this piece of music , we have this idea .
And so on . My career would probably last about five years .
However , what I have to do as a musician is do everything that is not on the music .
Everything that there isnt time to learn from a teacher , or to talk about , even , from a teacher .
But its the things that you notice when youre not actually with your instrument that in fact become so interesting , and that you want to explore through this tiny , tiny surface of a drum .
So there , we experience the translation . Now well experience the interpretation .
Now my career may last a little longer !
But in a way , you know , its the same if I look at you and I see a nice bright young lady with a pink top on .
I see that youre clutching a teddy bear , etc . , etc .
So I get a basic idea as to what you might be about , what you might like , what you might do as a profession , etc . , etc .
However , thats just , you know , the initial idea I may have that we all get when we actually look , and we try to interpret , but actually its so unbelievably shallow .
In the same way , I look at the music ; I get a basic idea ; I wonder what technically might be hard , or , you know , what I want to do .
Just the basic feeling .
However , that is simply not enough .
And I think what Herbie said  -  -  please listen , listen .
We have to listen to ourselves , first of all .
If I play , for example , holding the stick  -  -  where literally I do not let go of the stick  -  -  youll experience quite a lot of shock coming up through the arm .
And you feel really quite  -  -  believe it or not  -  -  detached from the instrument and from the stick , even though Im actually holding the stick quite tightly .
By holding it tightly , I feel strangely more detached .
If I just simply let go and allow my hand , my arm , to be more of a support system , suddenly I have more dynamic with less effort . Much more .
And I just feel , at last , one with the stick and one with the drum .
And Im doing far , far less .
So in the same way that I need time with this instrument , I need time with people in order to interpret them .
Not just translate them , but interpret them .
If , for example , I play just a few bars of a piece of music for which I think of myself as a technician  -  -  that is , someone who is basically a percussion player ...
And so on . If I think of myself as a musician ...
And so on . There is a little bit of a difference there that is worth just  -  -   -  -  thinking about .
And I remember when I was 12 years old , and I started playing tympani and percussion , and my teacher said ,  Well , how are we going to do this ? You know , music is about listening . 
And I said ,  Yes , I agree with that . So whats the problem ? 
And he said ,  Well , how are you going to hear this ? How are you going to hear that ? 
And I said ,  Well , how do you hear it ? 
He said ,  Well , I think I hear it through here . 
And I said ,  Well , I think I do too  -  -  but I also hear it through my hands , through my arms , cheekbones , my scalp , my tummy , my chest , my legs and so on . 
And so we began our lessons every single time tuning drums  -  -  in particular , the kettle drums , or tympani  -  -  to such a narrow pitch interval , so something like ...
that of a difference . Then gradually ... and gradually ...
and its amazing that when you do open your body up , and open your hand up to allow the vibration to come through , that in fact the tiny , tiny difference ...
can be felt with just the tiniest part of your finger , there .
And so what we would do is that I would put my hands on the wall of the music room , and together we would  listen  to the sounds of the instruments , and really try to connect with those sounds far , far more broadly than simply depending on the ear .
Because of course , the ear is , I mean , subject to all sorts of things .
The room we happen to be in , the amplification , the quality of the instrument , the type of sticks ... etc . , etc .
Theyre all different .
Same amount of weight , but different sound colors .
And thats basically what we are . Were just human beings , but we all have our own little sound colors , as it were , that make up these extraordinary personalities and characters and interests and things .
And as I grew older , I then auditioned for the Royal Academy of Music in London , and they said ,  Well , no , we wont accept you , because we havent a clue , you know , of the future of a so - called deaf musician . 
And I just couldnt quite accept that .
And so therefore , I said to them ,  Well , look , if you refuse  -  -  if you refuse me through those reasons , as opposed to the ability to perform and to understand and love the art of creating sound  -  -  then we have to think very , very hard about the people you do actually accept . 
And as a result  -  -  once we got over a little hurdle , and having to audition twice  -  -  they accepted me . And not only that  -  -  what had happened was that it changed the whole role of the music institutions throughout the United Kingdom .
Under no circumstances were they to refuse any application whatsoever on the basis of whether someone had no arms , no legs  -  -  they could still perhaps play a wind instrument if it was supported on a stand .
No circumstances at all were used to refuse any entry .
And every single entry had to be listened to , experienced and then based on the musical ability  -  -  then that person could either enter or not .
So therefore , this in turn meant that there was an extremely interesting bunch of students who arrived in these various music institutions .
And I have to say , many of them now in the professional orchestras throughout the world .
The interesting thing about this as well , though  -  -   -  -  is quite simply that not only were people connected with sound  -  -  which is basically all of us , and we well know that music really is our daily medicine .
I say  music ,  but actually I mean  sound . 
Because you know , some of the extraordinary things Ive experienced as a musician , when you may have a 15 - year - old lad who has got the most incredible challenges , who may not be able to control his movements , who may be deaf , who may be blind , etc . , etc .  -  -  suddenly , if that young lad sits close to this instrument , and perhaps even lies underneath the marimba , and you play something thats so incredibly organ - like , almost  -  -  I dont really have the right sticks , perhaps  -  -  but something like this . Let me change .
Something thats so unbelievably simple  -  -  but he would be experiencing something that I wouldnt be , because Im on top of the sound .
I have the sound coming this way .
He would have the sound coming through the resonators .
If there were no resonators on here , we would have ...
So he would have a fullness of sound that those of you in the front few rows wouldnt experience , those of you in the back few rows wouldnt experience either .
Every single one of us , depending on where were sitting , will experience this sound quite , quite differently .
And of course , being the participator of the sound , and that is starting from the idea of what type of sound I want to produce  -  -  for example , this sound .
Can you hear anything ?
Exactly . Because Im not even touching it .
But yet , we get the sensation of something happening .
In the same way that when I see tree moves , then I imagine that tree making a rustling sound .
Do you see what I mean ?
Whatever the eye sees , then theres always sound happening .
So theres always , always that huge  -  -  I mean , just this kaleidoscope of things to draw from .
So all of my performances are based on entirely what I experience , and not by learning a piece of music , putting on someone elses interpretation of it , buying all the CDs possible of that particular piece of music , and so on and so forth .
Because that isnt giving me enough of something that is so raw and so basic , and something that I can fully experience the journey of .
So it may be that , in certain halls , this dynamic may well work .
It may be that in other halls , theyre simply not going to experience that at all and so therefore , my level of soft , gentle playing may have to be ...
Do you see what I mean ? So , because of this explosion in access to sound , especially through the deaf community , this has not only affected how music institutions , how schools for the deaf treat sound  -  -  and not just as a means of therapy  -  -  although of course , being a participator of music , that definitely is the case as well .
But its meant that acousticians have had to really think about the types of halls they put together . There are so few halls in this world that actually have very good acoustics , dare I say . But by that I mean where you can absolutely do anything you imagine .
The tiniest , softest , softest sound to something that is so broad , so huge , so incredible ! Theres always something  -  -  it may sound good up there , may not be so good there .
May be great there , but terrible up there .
Maybe terrible over there , but not too bad there , etc . , etc .
So to find an actual hall is incredible  -  -  for which you can play exactly what you imagine , without it being cosmetically enhanced .
And so therefore , acousticians are actually in conversation with people who are hearing impaired , and who are participators of sound .
And this is quite interesting .
I can not , you know , give you any detail as far as what is actually happening with those halls , but its just the fact that they are going to a group of people for whom so many years weve been saying ,  Well , how on Earth can they experience music ? You know , theyre deaf . 
We just  -  -  we go like that , and we imagine that thats what deafness is about .
Or we go like that , and we imagine thats what blindness is about .
If we see someone in a wheelchair , we assume they can not walk .
It may be that they can walk three , four , five steps . That , to them , means they can walk .
In a years time , it could be two extra steps .
In another years time , three extra steps .
Those are hugely important aspects to think about .
So when we do listen to each other , its unbelievably important for us to really test our listening skills , to really use our bodies as a resonating chamber , to stop the judgment .
For me , as a musician who deals with 99 percent of new music , its very easy for me to say ,  Oh yes , I like that piece .
Oh no , I dont like that piece .  And so on .
And you know , I just find that I have to give those pieces of music real time .
It may be that the chemistry isnt quite right between myself and that particular piece of music , but that doesnt mean I have the right to say its a bad piece of music .
And you know , its just one of the great things about being a musician , is that it is so unbelievably fluid .
So there are no rules , no right , no wrong , this way , that way .
If I asked you to clap  -  -  maybe I can do this .
If I can just say ,  Please clap and create the sound of thunder . 
Im assuming weve all experienced thunder .
Now , I dont mean just the sound ; I mean really listen to that thunder within yourselves .
And please try to create that through your clapping . Try . Just  -  -  please try .
Very good ! Snow . Snow . Have you ever heard snow ?
Audience : No .
Evelyn Glennie : Well then , stop clapping . Try again .
Try again . Snow .
See , youre awake .
Rain . Not bad . Not bad .
You know , the interesting thing here , though , is that I asked a group of kids not so long ago exactly the same question .
Now  -  -  great imagination , thank you very much .
However , not one of you got out of your seats to think ,  Right ! How can I clap ? OK , maybe ...
Maybe I can use my jewelry to create extra sounds .
Maybe I can use the other parts of my body to create extra sounds . 
Not a single one of you thought about clapping in a slightly different way other than sitting in your seats there and using two hands .
In the same way that when we listen to music , we assume that its all being fed through here .
This is how we experience music . Of course its not .
We experience thunder  -  -  thunder , thunder . Think , think , think .
Listen , listen , listen . Now  -  -  what can we do with thunder ?
I remember my teacher . When I first started , my very first lesson , I was all prepared with sticks , ready to go .
And instead of him saying ,  OK , Evelyn , please , feet slightly apart , arms at a more - or - less 90 degree angle , sticks in a more - or - less V shape , keep this amount of space here , etc .
Please keep your back straight , etc . , etc . , etc .   -  -  where I was probably just going to end up absolutely rigid , frozen , and I would not be able to strike the drum , because I was thinking of so many other things  -  -  he said ,  Evelyn , take this drum away for seven days , and Ill see you next week . 
So , heavens ! What was I to do ? I no longer required the sticks ; I wasnt allowed to have these sticks .
I had to basically look at this particular drum , see how it was made , what these little lugs did , what the snares did .
Turned it upside down , experimented with the shell , experimented with the head .
Experimented with my body , experimented with jewelry , experimented with all sorts of things .
And of course , I returned with all sorts of bruises and things like that  -  -  but nevertheless , it was such an unbelievable experience , because then , where on Earth are you going to experience that in a piece of music ?
Where on Earth are you going to experience that in a study book ?
So we never , ever dealt with actual study books .
So for example , one of the things that we learn when we are dealing with being a percussion player , as opposed to a musician , is basically straightforward single stroke rolls .
Like that . And then we get a little faster and a little faster and a little faster .
And so on and so forth . What does this piece require ?
Single stroke rolls . So why cant I then do that whilst learning a piece of music ?
And thats exactly what he did .
And interestingly , the older I became , and when I became a full - time student at a so called  music institution ,  all of that went out of the window .
We had to study from study books .
And constantly , the question ,  Well , why ? Why ? What is this relating to ?
I need to play a piece of music .   Oh , well , this will help your control ! 
 Well , how ? Why do I need to learn that ? I need to relate it to a piece of music .
You know . I need to say something .
 Why am I practicing paradiddles ?
Is it just literally for control , for hand - stick control ? Why am I doing that ?
I need to have the reason , and the reason has to be by saying something through the music . 
And by saying something through music , which basically is sound , we then can reach all sorts of things to all sorts of people .
But I dont want to take responsibility of your emotional baggage .
Thats up to you , when you walk through a hall .
Because that then determines what and how we listen to certain things .
I may feel sorrowful , or happy , or exhilarated , or angry when I play certain pieces of music , but Im not necessarily wanting you to feel exactly the same thing .
So please , the next time you go to a concert , just allow your body to open up , allow your body to be this resonating chamber .
Be aware that youre not going to experience the same thing as the performer is .
The performer is in the worst possible position for the actual sound , because theyre hearing the contact of the stick on the drum , or the mallet on the bit of wood , or the bow on the string , etc . , or the breath thats creating the sound from wind and brass .
Theyre experiencing that rawness there .
But yet theyre experiencing something so unbelievably pure , which is before the sound is actually happening .
Please take note of the life of the sound after the actual initial strike , or breath , is being pulled . Just experience the whole journey of that sound in the same way that I wished Id experienced the whole journey of this particular conference , rather than just arriving last night .
But I hope maybe we can share one or two things as the day progresses .
But thank you very much for having me !
Adam Sadowsky : How to engineer a viral music video
The band OK Go dreamed up the idea of a massive Rube Goldberg machine for their next music video  -  -  and Adam Sadowskys team was charged with building it . He tells the story of the effort and engineering behind their labyrinthine creation that quickly became the YouTube sensation  This Too Shall Pass .  
Hi there .
Im going to be talking a little bit about music , machines and life .
Or , more specifically , what we learned from the creation of a very large and complicated machine for a music video .
Some of you may recognize this image .
This is the opening frame of the video that we created .
Well be showing the video at the end , but before we do , I want to talk a little bit about what it is that they wanted .
Now , when we first started talking to OK Go  -  -  the name of the song is  This Too Shall Pass   -  -  we were really excited because they expressed interest in building a machine that they could dance with .
And we were very excited about this because , of course , they have a history of dancing with machines .
Theyre responsible for this video ,  Here It Goes Again . 
50 - million - plus views on YouTube .
Four guys dancing on treadmills , no cuts , just a static camera .
A fantastically viral and wonderful video .
So we were really excited about working with them .
And we sort of started talking about what it is that they wanted .
And they explained that they wanted kind of a Rube Goldberg machine .
Now , for those of you who dont know , a Rube Goldberg machine is a complicated contraption , an incredibly over - engineered piece of machinery that accomplishes a relatively simple task .
So we were excited by this idea , and we started talking about exactly what it would look like .
And we came up with some parameters , because , you know , building a Rube Goldberg machine has limitations , but it also is pretty wide open .
And we wanted to make sure that we did something that would work for a music video .
So we came up with a list of requirements , the  10 commandments ,  and they were , in order of ascending difficulty : The first is  No magic . 
Everything that happened on screen had to be very easily understood by a typical viewer .
The rule of thumb was that , if my mother couldnt understand it , then we couldnt use it in the video .
They wanted band integration , that is , the machine acting upon the band members , specifically not the other way around .
They wanted the machine action to follow the song feeling .
So as the song picks up emotion , so should the machine get grander in its process .
They wanted us to make use of the space .
So we have this 10,000 - square - foot warehouse we were using , divided between two floors .
It included an exterior loading dock .
We used all of that , including a giant hole in the floor that we actually descended the camera and cameraman through .
They wanted it messy , and we were happy to oblige .
The machine itself would start the music .
So the machine would get started , it would travel some distance , reacting along the way , hit play on an iPod or a tape deck or something that would start playback .
And the machine would maintain synchronization throughout .
And speaking of synchronization , they wanted it to sync to the rhythm and to hit specific beats along the way .
Okay .
They wanted it to end precisely on time .
Okay , so now the start to finish timing has to be perfect .
And they wanted the music to drop out at a certain point in the video and actual live audio from the machine to play part of the song .
And as if that wasnt enough , all of these incredibly complicating things , right , they wanted it in one shot .
Okay .
So , just some statistics about what we went through in the process .
The machine itself has 89 distinct interactions .
It took us 85 takes to get it on film to our satisfaction .
Of those 85 takes , only three actually successfully completed their run .
We destroyed two pianos and 10 televisions in the process .
We went to Home Depot well over a hundred times .
And we lost one high - heeled shoe when one of our engineers , Heather Knight , left her high - heeled shoe  -  -  after a nice dinner , and returned back to the build  -  -  and left it in a pile of stuff .
And another engineer thought ,  Well , that would be a really good thing to use  and ended up using it as a really nice trigger .
And its actually in the machine .
So what did we learn from all of this ?
Well , having completed this , we have the opportunity to step back and reflect on some of the things .
And we learned that small stuff stinks .
Little balls in wooden tracks are really susceptible to humidity and temperature and a little bit of dust , and they fall out of the tracks , the exact angles makes it hard to get right .
And yet , a bowling ball will always follow the same path .
It doesnt matter what temperature it is , doesnt matter whats in its way ; it will pretty much get where it needs to go .
But as much as the small stuff stinks , we needed somewhere to start , so that we would have somewhere to go .
And so you have to start with it . You have to focus on it .
Small stuff stinks , but , of course , its essential , right ?
What else ? Planning is incredibly important .
You know , we spent a lot of time ideating and even building some of these things .
Its been said that ,  No battle plan survives contact with the enemy . 
I think our enemy was physics  -  -  and shes a cruel mistress .
Often , we had to pull things out as a result because of timing or aesthetics or whatever .
And so while planning is important , so is flexibility .
These are all things that ended up not making it into the final machine .
So also , put reliable stuff last , the stuff thats going to run every time .
Again , small to large is relevant here .
The little Lego car in the beginning of the video references the big , real car near the end of the video .
The big , real car works every time ; theres no problem about it .
The little one had a tendency to try to run off the track and thats a problem .
But you dont want to have to reset the whole machine because the Lego car at the end doesnt work , right .
So you put that up front so that , if it fails , at least you know you dont have to reset the whole thing .
Life can be messy .
There were incredibly difficult moments in the building of this thing .
Months were spent in this tiny , cold warehouse .
And the wonderful elation that we had when we finally completed it .
So its important to remember that whether its good or its bad ,  This Too Shall Pass . 
Thank you very much .
And now to introduce their music video , we have OK Go .
OK Go : An introduction . Hello TEDxUSC .
We are OK Go .
What are we doing ? Oh , just hanging out with our Grammy . What what !
It think we can do better than this . Hello TEDxUSC .
We are OK Go . Have you read the  Natural Curiosity Cabinet ? 
I mean ,  Curiosity   -  -  excuse me .
Let me start again .
We need some more ridiculous things besides  The Cabinet of Natural Curiosities . 
Tims sundial hat .
Have you seen the new work theyve done to the Waltz Towers ?
Sorry , start again .
Dogs .
Hello , TEDxUSC . We are OK Go , and this our new video ,  This Too Shall Pass . 
 unclear  Kay , we can still do one better I think , yeah .
That ones pretty good . Its getting better .
You know you cant keep letting it get you down And you cant keep dragging that dead weight around If there aint all that much to lug around Better run like hell when you hit the ground When the morning comes When the morning comes You cant stop these kids from dancing Why would you want to ? Especially when youre already getting yours Cuz if your mind dont move and your knees dont bend Well dont go blaming the kids again When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes Let it go This too shall pass Let it go This too shall pass You know you cant keep letting it get you down No , you cant keep letting it get you down Let it go This too shall pass When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes
James Hansen : Why I must speak out about climate change
Top climate scientist James Hansen tells the story of his involvement in the science of and debate over global climate change . In doing so he outlines the overwhelming evidence that change is happening and why that makes him deeply worried about the future .
What do I know that would cause me , a reticent , Midwestern scientist , to get myself arrested in front of the White House protesting ?
And what would you do if you knew what I know ?
Lets start with how I got to this point .
I was lucky to grow up at a time when it was not difficult for the child of a tenant farmer to make his way to the state university .
And I was really lucky to go to the University of Iowa where I could study under Professor James Van Allen who built instruments for the first U.S . satellites .
Professor Van Allen told me about observations of Venus , that there was intense microwave radiation .
Did it mean that Venus had an ionosphere ?
Or was Venus extremely hot ?
The right answer , confirmed by the Soviet Venera spacecraft , was that Venus was very hot  -  -  900 degrees Fahrenheit .
And it was kept hot by a thick carbon dioxide atmosphere .
I was fortunate to join NASA and successfully propose an experiment to fly to Venus .
Our instrument took this image of the veil of Venus , which turned out to be a smog of sulfuric acid .
But while our instrument was being built , I became involved in calculations of the greenhouse effect here on Earth , because we realized that our atmospheric composition was changing .
Eventually , I resigned as principal investigator on our Venus experiment because a planet changing before our eyes is more interesting and important .
Its changes will affect all of humanity .
The greenhouse effect had been well understood for more than a century .
British physicist John Tyndall , in the 1850s , made laboratory measurements of the infrared radiation , which is heat .
And he showed that gasses such as CO2 absorb heat , thus acting like a blanket warming Earths surface .
I worked with other scientists to analyze Earth climate observations .
In 1981 , we published an article in Science magazine concluding that observed warming of 0.4 degrees Celsius in the prior century was consistent with the greenhouse effect of increasing CO2 .
That Earth would likely warm in the 1980s , and warming would exceed the noise level of random weather by the end of the century .
We also said that the 21st century would see shifting climate zones , creation of drought - prone regions in North America and Asia , erosion of ice sheets , rising sea levels and opening of the fabled Northwest Passage .
All of these impacts or are now well under way .
That paper was reported on the front page of the New York Times and led to me testifying to Congress in the 1980s , testimony in which I emphasized that global warming increases both extremes of the Earths water cycle .
Heatwaves and droughts on one hand , directly from the warming , but also , because a warmer atmosphere holds more water vapor with its latent energy , rainfall will become in more extreme events .
There will be stronger storms and greater flooding .
Global warming hoopla became time - consuming and distracted me from doing science  -  -  partly because I had complained that the White House altered my testimony .
So I decided to go back to strictly doing science and leave the communication to others .
By 15 years later , evidence of global warming was much stronger .
Most of the things mentioned in our 1981 paper were facts .
I had the privilege to speak twice to the presidents climate task force .
But energy policies continued to focus on finding more fossil fuels .
By then we had two grandchildren , Sophie and Connor .
I decided that I did not want them in the future to say ,  Opa understood what was happening , but he didnt make it clear . 
So I decided to give a public talk criticizing the lack of an appropriate energy policy .
I gave the talk at the University of Iowa in 2004 and at the 2005 meeting of the American Geophysical Union .
This led to calls from the White House to NASA headquarters and I was told that I could not give any talks or speak with the media without prior explicit approval by NASA headquarters .
After I informed the New York Times about these restrictions , NASA was forced to end the censorship .
But there were consequences .
I had been using the first line of the NASA mission statement ,  To understand and protect the home planet ,  to justify my talks .
Soon the first line of the mission statement was deleted , never to appear again .
Over the next few years I was drawn more and more into trying to communicate the urgency of a change in energy policies , while still researching the physics of climate change .
Let me describe the most important conclusion from the physics  -  -  first , from Earths energy balance and , second , from Earths climate history .
Adding CO2 to the air is like throwing another blanket on the bed .
It reduces Earths heat radiation to space , so theres a temporary energy imbalance .
More energy is coming in than going out , until Earth warms up enough to again radiate to space as much energy as it absorbs from the Sun .
So the key quantity is Earths energy imbalance .
Is there more energy coming in than going out ?
If so , more warming is in the pipeline .
It will occur without adding any more greenhouse gasses .
Now finally , we can measure Earths energy imbalance precisely by measuring the heat content in Earths heat reservoirs .
The biggest reservoir , the ocean , was the least well measured , until more than 3,000 Argo floats were distributed around the worlds ocean .
These floats reveal that the upper half of the ocean is gaining heat at a substantial rate .
The deep ocean is also gaining heat at a smaller rate , and energy is going into the net melting of ice all around the planet .
And the land , to depths of tens of meters , is also warming .
The total energy imbalance now is about six - tenths of a watt per square meter .
That may not sound like much , but when added up over the whole world , its enormous .
Its about 20 times greater than the rate of energy use by all of humanity .
Its equivalent to exploding 400,000 Hiroshima atomic bombs per day 365 days per year .
Thats how much extra energy Earth is gaining each day .
This imbalance , if we want to stabilize climate , means that we must reduce CO2 from 391 ppm , parts per million , back to 350 ppm .
That is the change needed to restore energy balance and prevent further warming .
Climate change deniers argue that the Sun is the main cause of climate change .
But the measured energy imbalance occurred during the deepest solar minimum in the record , when the Suns energy reaching Earth was least .
Yet , there was more energy coming in than going out .
This shows that the effect of the Suns variations on climate is overwhelmed by the increasing greenhouse gasses , mainly from burning fossil fuels .
Now consider Earths climate history .
These curves for global temperature , atmospheric CO2 and sea level were derived from ocean cores and Antarctic ice cores , from ocean sediments and snowflakes that piled up year after year over 800,000 years forming a two - mile thick ice sheet .
As you see , theres a high correlation between temperature , CO2 and sea level .
Careful examination shows that the temperature changes slightly lead the CO2 changes by a few centuries .
Climate change deniers like to use this fact to confuse and trick the public by saying ,  Look , the temperature causes CO2 to change , not vice versa . 
But that lag is exactly what is expected .
Small changes in Earths orbit that occur over tens to hundreds of thousands of years alter the distribution of sunlight on Earth .
When there is more sunlight at high latitudes in summer , ice sheets melt .
Shrinking ice sheets make the planet darker , so it absorbs more sunlight and becomes warmer .
A warmer ocean releases CO2 , just as a warm Coca - Cola does .
And more CO2 causes more warming .
So CO2 , methane , and ice sheets were feedbacks that amplified global temperature change causing these ancient climate oscillations to be huge , even though the climate change was initiated by a very weak forcing .
The important point is that these same amplifying feedbacks will occur today .
The physics does not change .
As Earth warms , now because of extra CO2 we put in the atmosphere , ice will melt , and CO2 and methane will be released by warming ocean and melting permafrost .
While we cant say exactly how fast these amplifying feedbacks will occur , it is certain they will occur , unless we stop the warming .
There is evidence that feedbacks are already beginning .
Precise measurements by GRACE , the gravity satellite , reveal that both Greenland and Antarctica are now losing mass , several hundred cubic kilometers per year .
And the rate has accelerated since the measurements began nine years ago .
Methane is also beginning to escape from the permafrost .
What sea level rise can we look forward to ?
The last time CO2 was 390 ppm , todays value , sea level was higher by at least 15 meters , 50 feet .
Where you are sitting now would be under water .
Most estimates are that , this century , we will get at least one meter .
I think it will be more if we keep burning fossil fuels , perhaps even five meters , which is 18 feet , this century or shortly thereafter .
The important point is that we will have started a process that is out of humanitys control .
Ice sheets would continue to disintegrate for centuries .
There would be no stable shoreline .
The economic consequences are almost unthinkable .
Hundreds of New Orleans - like devastations around the world .
What may be more reprehensible , if climate denial continues , is extermination of species .
The monarch butterfly could be one of the 20 to 50 percent of all species that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates will be ticketed for extinction by the end of the century if we stay on business - as - usual fossil fuel use .
Global warming is already affecting people .
The Texas , Oklahoma , Mexico heatwave and drought last year , Moscow the year before and Europe in 2003 , were all exceptional events , more than three standard deviations outside the norm .
Fifty years ago , such anomalies covered only two -  to three - tenths of one percent of the land area .
In recent years , because of global warming , they now cover about 10 percent  -  -  an increase by a factor of 25 to 50 .
So we can say with a high degree of confidence that the severe Texas and Moscow heatwaves were not natural ; they were caused by global warming .
An important impact , if global warming continues , will be on the breadbasket of our nation and the world , the Midwest and Great Plains , which are expected to become prone to extreme droughts , worse than the Dust Bowl , within just a few decades , if we let global warming continue .
How did I get dragged deeper and deeper into an attempt to communicate , giving talks in 10 countries , getting arrested , burning up the vacation time that I had accumulated over 30 years ?
More grandchildren helped me along .
Jake is a super - positive , enthusiastic boy .
Here at age two and a half years , he thinks he can protect his two and a half - day - old little sister .
It would be immoral to leave these young people with a climate system spiraling out of control .
Now the tragedy about climate change is that we can solve it with a simple , honest approach of a gradually rising carbon fee collected from fossil fuel companies and distributed 100 percent electronically every month to all legal residents on a per capita basis , with the government not keeping one dime .
Most people would get more in the monthly dividend than theyd pay in increased prices .
This fee and dividend would stimulate the economy and innovations , creating millions of jobs .
It is the principal requirement for moving us rapidly to a clean energy future .
Several top economists are coauthors on this proposition .
Jim DiPeso of Republicans for Environmental Protection describes it thusly :  Transparent . Market - based .
Does not enlarge government .
Leaves energy decisions to individual choices .
Sounds like a conservative climate plan . 
But instead of placing a rising fee on carbon emissions to make fossil fuels pay their true cost to society , our governments are forcing the public to subsidize fossil fuels by 400 to 500 billion dollars per year worldwide , thus encouraging extraction of every fossil fuel  -  -  mountaintop removal , longwall mining , fracking , tar sands , tar shale , deep ocean Arctic drilling .
This path , if continued , guarantees that we will pass tipping points leading to ice sheet disintegration that will accelerate out of control of future generations .
A large fraction of species will be committed to extinction .
And increasing intensity of droughts and floods will severely impact breadbaskets of the world , causing massive famines and economic decline .
Imagine a giant asteroid on a direct collision course with Earth .
That is the equivalent of what we face now .
Yet , we dither , taking no action to divert the asteroid , even though the longer we wait , the more difficult and expensive it becomes .
If we had started in 2005 , it would have required emission reductions of three percent per year to restore planetary energy balance and stabilize climate this century .
If we start next year , it is six percent per year .
If we wait 10 years , it is 15 percent per year  -  -  extremely difficult and expensive , perhaps impossible .
But we arent even starting .
So now you know what I know that is moving me to sound this alarm .
Clearly , I havent gotten this message across .
The science is clear .
I need your help to communicate the gravity and the urgency of this situation and its solutions more effectively .
We owe it to our children and grandchildren .
Thank you .
Laura Snyder : The Philosophical Breakfast Club
In 1812 , four men at Cambridge University met for breakfast . What began as an impassioned meal grew into a new scientific revolution , in which these men  -  -  who called themselves  natural philosophers  until they later coined  scientist   -  -  introduced four major principles into scientific inquiry . Historian and philosopher Laura Snyder tells their intriguing story .
Id like you to come back with me for a moment to the 19th century , specifically to June 24 , 1833 .
The British Association for the Advancement of Science is holding its third meeting at the University of Cambridge .
Its the first night of the meeting , and a confrontation is about to take place that will change science forever .
An elderly , white - haired man stands up .
The members of the Association are shocked to realize that its the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge , who hadnt even left his house in years until that day .
Theyre even more shocked by what he says .
 You must stop calling yourselves natural philosophers . 
Coleridge felt that true philosophers like himself pondered the cosmos from their armchairs .
They were not mucking around in the fossil pits or conducting messy experiments with electrical piles like the members of the British Association .
The crowd grew angry and began to complain loudly .
A young Cambridge scholar named William Whewell stood up and quieted the audience .
He politely agreed that an appropriate name for the members of the association did not exist .
 If philosophers is taken to be too wide and lofty a term ,  he said ,  then , by analogy with artist , we may form scientist .  This was the first time the word scientist was uttered in public , only 179 years ago .
I first found out about this confrontation when I was in graduate school , and it kind of blew me away .
I mean , how could the word scientist not have existed until 1833 ?
What were scientists called before ?
What had changed to make a new name necessary precisely at that moment ?
Prior to this meeting , those who studied the natural world were talented amateurs .
Think of the country clergyman or squire collecting his beetles or fossils , like Charles Darwin , for example , or , the hired help of a nobleman , like Joseph Priestley , who was the literary companion to the Marquis of Lansdowne when he discovered oxygen .
After this , they were scientists , professionals with a particular scientific method , goals , societies and funding .
Much of this revolution can be traced to four men who met at Cambridge University in 1812 : Charles Babbage , John Herschel , Richard Jones and William Whewell .
These were brilliant , driven men who accomplished amazing things .
Charles Babbage , I think known to most TEDsters , invented the first mechanical calculator and the first prototype of a modern computer .
John Herschel mapped the stars of the southern hemisphere , and , in his spare time , co - invented photography .
Im sure we could all be that productive without Facebook or Twitter to take up our time .
Richard Jones became an important economist who later influenced Karl Marx .
And Whewell not only coined the term scientist , as well as the words anode , cathode and ion , but spearheaded international big science with his global research on the tides .
In the Cambridge winter of 1812 and 1813 , the four met for what they called philosophical breakfasts .
They talked about science and the need for a new scientific revolution .
They felt science had stagnated since the days of the scientific revolution that had happened in the 17th century .
It was time for a new revolution , which they pledged to bring about , and whats so amazing about these guys is , not only did they have these grandiose undergraduate dreams , but they actually carried them out , even beyond their wildest dreams .
And Im going to tell you today about four major changes to science these men made .
About 200 years before , Francis Bacon and then , later , Isaac Newton , had proposed an inductive scientific method .
Now thats a method that starts from observations and experiments and moves to generalizations about nature called natural laws , which are always subject to revision or rejection should new evidence arise .
However , in 1809 , David Ricardo muddied the waters by arguing that the science of economics should use a different , deductive method .
The problem was that an influential group at Oxford began arguing that because it worked so well in economics , this deductive method ought to be applied to the natural sciences too .
The members of the philosophical breakfast club disagreed .
They wrote books and articles promoting inductive method in all the sciences that were widely read by natural philosophers , university students and members of the public .
Reading one of Herschels books was such a watershed moment for Charles Darwin that he would later say ,  Scarcely anything in my life made so deep an impression on me .
It made me wish to add my might to the accumulated store of natural knowledge . 
It also shaped Darwins scientific method , as well as that used by his peers .
 Science for the public good  Previously , it was believed that scientific knowledge ought to be used for the good of the king or queen , or for ones own personal gain .
For example , ship captains needed to know information about the tides in order to safely dock at ports .
Harbormasters would gather this knowledge and sell it to the ship captains .
The philosophical breakfast club changed that , working together .
Whewells worldwide study of the tides resulted in public tide tables and tidal maps that freely provided the harbormasters knowledge to all ship captains .
Herschel helped by making tidal observations off the coast of South Africa , and , as he complained to Whewell , he was knocked off the docks during a violent high tide for his trouble .
The four men really helped each other in every way .
They also relentlessly lobbied the British government for the money to build Babbages engines because they believed these engines would have a huge practical impact on society .
In the days before pocket calculators , the numbers that most professionals needed  -  -  bankers , insurance agents , ship captains , engineers — were to be found in lookup books like this , filled with tables of figures .
These tables were calculated using a fixed procedure over and over by part - time workers known as  -  -  and this is amazing  -  -  computers , but these calculations were really difficult .
I mean , this nautical almanac published the lunar differences for every month of the year .
Each month required 1,365 calculations , so these tables were filled with mistakes .
Babbages difference engine was the first mechanical calculator devised to accurately compute any of these tables .
Two models of his engine were built in the last 20 years by a team from the Science Museum of London using his own plans .
This is the one now at the Computer History Museum in California , and it calculates accurately . It actually works .
Later , Babbages analytical engine was the first mechanical computer in the modern sense .
It had a separate memory and central processor .
It was capable of iteration , conditional branching and parallel processing , and it was programmable using punched cards , an idea Babbage took from Jacquards loom .
Tragically , Babbages engines never were built in his day because most people thought that non - human computers would have no usefulness for the public .
 New scientific institutions  Founded in Bacons time , the Royal Society of London was the foremost scientific society in England and even in the rest of the world .
By the 19th century , it had become a kind of gentlemans club populated mainly by antiquarians , literary men and the nobility .
The members of the philosophical breakfast club helped form a number of new scientific societies , including the British Association .
These new societies required that members be active researchers publishing their results .
They reinstated the tradition of the Q and A after scientific papers were read , which had been discontinued by the Royal Society as being ungentlemanly .
And for the first time , they gave women a foot in the door of science .
Members were encouraged to bring their wives , daughters and sisters to the meetings of the British Association , and while the women were expected to attend only the public lectures and the social events like this one , they began to infiltrate the scientific sessions as well .
The British Association would later be the first of the major national science organizations in the world to admit women as full members .
 External funding for science  Up to the 19th century , natural philosophers were expected to pay for their own equipment and supplies .
Occasionally , there were prizes , such as that given to John Harrison in the 18th century , for solving the so - called longitude problem , but prizes were only given after the fact , when they were given at all .
On the advice of the philosophical breakfast club , the British Association began to use the extra money generated by its meetings to give grants for research in astronomy , the tides , fossil fish , shipbuilding , and many other areas .
These grants not only allowed less wealthy men to conduct research , but they also encouraged thinking outside the box , rather than just trying to solve one pre - set question .
Eventually , the Royal Society and the scientific societies of other countries followed suit , and this has become  -  -  fortunately its become  -  -  a major part of the scientific landscape today .
So the philosophical breakfast club helped invent the modern scientist .
Thats the heroic part of their story .
Theres a flip side as well .
They did not foresee at least one consequence of their revolution .
They would have been deeply dismayed by todays disjunction between science and the rest of culture .
Its shocking to realize that only 28 percent of American adults have even a very basic level of science literacy , and this was tested by asking simple questions like ,  Did humans and dinosaurs inhabit the Earth at the same time ? 
and  What proportion of the Earth is covered in water ? 
Once scientists became members of a professional group , they were slowly walled off from the rest of us .
This is the unintended consequence of the revolution that started with our four friends .
Charles Darwin said ,  I sometimes think that general and popular treatises are almost as important for the progress of science as original work . 
In fact ,  Origin of Species  was written for a general and popular audience , and was widely read when it first appeared .
Darwin knew what we seem to have forgotten , that science is not only for scientists .
Thank you .
Zach Kaplan + Keith Schacht : Toys and materials from the future
The Inventables guys , Zach Kaplan and Keith Schacht , demo some amazing new materials and how we might use them . Look for squishy magnets , odor - detecting ink ,  dry  liquid and a very surprising 10 - foot pole .
Zach Kaplan : Keith and I lead a research team .
We investigate materials and technologies that have unexpected properties . Over the last three years , we found over 200 of these things , and so we looked back into our library and selected six we thought would be most surprising for TED .
Of these six , the first one that were going to talk about is in the black envelope youre holding .
It comes from a company in Japan called GelTech . Now go ahead and open it up .
Keith Schacht : Now be sure and take the two pieces apart .
Whats unexpected about this is that its soft , but its also a strong magnet .
Zach and I have always been fascinated observing unexpected things like this .
We spent a long time thinking about why this is , and its just recently that we realized : its when we see something unexpected , it changes our understanding of the way things work .
As youre seeing this gel magnet for the first time , if you assume that all magnets had to be hard , then seeing this surprised you and it changed your understanding of the way magnets could work .
ZK : Now , its important to understand what the unexpected properties are .
But to really think about the implications of what this makes possible , we found that it helps to think about how it could be applied in the world .
So , a first idea is to use it on cabinet doors .
If you line the sides of the cabinets using the gel material  -  -  if a cabinet slams shut it wouldnt make a loud noise , and in addition the magnets would draw the cabinets closed .
Imagine taking the same material , but putting it on the bottom of a sneaker .
You know , this way you could go to the container store and buy one of those metal sheets that they hang on the back of your door , in your closet , and you could literally stick your shoes up instead of using a shelf .
For me , I really love this idea .
If you come to my apartment and see my closet , Im sure youd figure out why : its a mess .
Seeing the unexpected properties and then seeing a couple of applications  -  -  it helps you see why this is significant , what the potential is .
But weve found that the way we present our ideas it makes a big difference .
ZK : It was like six months ago that Keith and I were out in L.A . , and we were at Starbucks having coffee with Roman Coppola .
He works on mostly music videos and commercials with his company , The Directors Bureau .
As we were talking , Roman told us that hes kind of an inventor on the side .
And we were showing him the same gel magnet that youre holding in your hand  -  -  and you know , we shared the same ideas . And you could see it in his face : Roman starts to get really excited and he whips out this manila folder ; he opens it up and Keith and I look in , and he starts showing us concepts that hes been working on .
These things just get him really excited . And so were looking at these concepts , and we were just like , whoa , this guys good .
Because the way that he presented the concept  -  -  his approach was totally different than ours . He sold it to you as if it was for sale right now .
When we were going in the car back to the airport , we were thinking : why was this so powerful ?
And as we thought about it more , we realized that it let you fill in all the details about the experience , just as if you saw it on TV . So , for TED we decided to take our favorite idea for the gel magnet and work with Roman and his team at the Directors Bureau to create a commercial for a product from the future .
Do you have a need for speed ?
Inventables Water Adventures dares you to launch yourself on a magnetically - levitating board down a waterslide so fast , so tall , that when you hit the bottom , it uses brakes to stop .
Aqua Rocket : coming this summer .
Now , we showed the concept to a few people before this , and they asked us , whens it coming out ?
So I just wanted to let you know , its not actually coming out , just the concept is .
ZK : So now , when we dream up these concepts , its important for us to make sure that they work from a technical standpoint .
So I just want to quickly explain how this would work .
This is the magnetically - levitating board that they mentioned in the commercial .
The gel that youre holding would be lining the bottom of the board .
Now this is important for two reasons .
One : the soft properties of the magnet that make it so that , if it were to hit the rider in the head , it wouldnt injure him .
In addition , you can see from the diagram on the right , the underpart of the slide would be an electromagnet .
So this would actually repel the rider a little bit as youre going down .
The force of the water rushing down , in addition to that repulsion force , would make this slide go faster than any slide on the market .
Its because of this that you need the magnetic braking system .
When you get to the very bottom of the slide  -  -   -  -  the rider passes through an aluminum tube .
And Im going to kick it to Keith to explain why thats important from a technical standpoint .
So Im sure all you engineers know that even though aluminum is a metal , its not a magnetic material . But something unexpected happens when you drop a magnet down an aluminum tube .
So we set up a quick experiment here to show that to you .
Now , you see the magnet fell really slowly .
Now , Im not going to get into the physics of it , but all you need to know is that the faster the magnets falling , the greater the stopping force .
ZK : Now , our next technology is actually a 10 - foot pole , and I have it right here in my pocket .
Therere a few different versions of it .
Some of them automatically unroll like this one .
They can be made to automatically roll up , or they can be made stable , like Zachs , to hold any position in between .
ZK : As we were talking to the vendor  -  -  to try to learn about how you could apply these , or how theyre being applied currently  -  -  he was telling us that , in the military they use this one so soldiers can keep it on their chests  -  -  very concealed  -  -  and then , when theyre out on the field , erect it as an antenna to clearly send signals back to the base .
In our brainstorms , we came up with the idea you could use it for a soccer goal : so at the end of the game , you just roll up the goal and put it in your gym bag .
Now , the interesting thing about this is , you dont have to be an engineer to appreciate why a 10 - foot pole that can fit in your pocket is so interesting .
So we decided to go out onto the streets of Chicago and ask a few people on the streets what they thought you could do with this .
I clean my ceiling fans with that and I get the spider webs off my house  -  -  I do it that way .
Id make my very own walking stick .
I would create a ladder to use to get up on top of the tree .
An olive server .
Some type of extension pole  -  -  like what the painters use .
I would make a spear that , when you went deep sea diving , you could catch the fish really fast , and then roll it back up , and you could swim easier ... Yeah .
ZK : Now , for our next technology were going to do a little demonstration , and so we need a volunteer from the audience .
You sir , come on up .
Come on up . Tell everybody your name .
Steve Jurvetson : Steve .
ZK : Its Steve . All right Steve , now , follow me .
We need you to stand right in front of the TED sign .
Right there . Thats great .
And hold onto this . Good luck to you .
No , not yet .
ZK : Id just like to let you all know that this presentation has been brought to you by Target .
Little bit  -  -  thats perfect , just perfect .
Now , Zach , were going to demonstrate a water gun fight from the future .
So here , come on up to the front . All right , so now if youll see here  -  -  no , no , its OK .
So , describe to the audience the temperature of your shirt . Go ahead .
SJ : Its cold .
Now the reason its cold is thats its not actually water loaded into these squirt guns  -  -  its a dry liquid developed by 3M .
Its perfectly clear , its odorless , its colorless .
Its so safe you could drink this stuff .
And the reason it feels cold is because it evaporates 25 times faster than water .
All right , well thanks for coming up .
ZK : Wait , wait , Steven  -  -  before you go we filled this with the dry liquid so during the break you can shoot your friends .
SJ : Excellent , thank you .
Thanks for coming up . Lets give him a big round of applause .
So whats the significance of this dry liquid ?
Early versions of the fluid were actually used on a Cray Supercomputer .
Now , the unexpected thing about this is that Zach could stand up on stage and drench a perfectly innocent member of the audience without any concern that wed damage the electronics , that wed get him wet , that wed hurt the books or the computers . It works because its non - conductive .
So you can see here , you can immerse a whole circuit board in this and it wouldnt cause any damage .
You can circulate it to draw the heat away .
But today its most widely used in office buildings  -  -  in the sprinkler system  -  -  as a fire - suppression fluid .
Again , its perfectly safe for people . It puts out the fires , doesnt hurt anything .
But our favorite idea for this was using it in a basketball game . So during halftime , it could rain down on the players , cool everyone down , and in a matter of minutes it would dry . Wouldnt hurt the court .
ZK : Our next technology comes to us from a company in Japan called Sekisui Chemical . One of their R and D engineers was working on a way to make plastic stiffer .
While he was doing this , he noticed an unexpected thing .
We have a video to show you .
So you see there , it didnt bounce back . Now , this was an unintended side effect of some experiments they were doing .
Its technically called ,  shape - retaining property . 
Now , think about your interactions with aluminum foil .
Shape - retaining is common in metal : you bend a piece of aluminum foil , and it holds its place . Contrast that with a plastic garbage can  -  -  and you can push in the sides and it always bounces back .
ZK : For example , you could make a watch that wraps around your wrist , but doesnt use a buckle .
Taking it a little further , if you wove those strips together  -  -  kind of like a little basket  -  -  you could make a shape - retaining sheet , and then you could embed it in a cloth : so you could make a picnic sheet that wraps around the table , so that way on a windy day it wouldnt blow away .
For our next technology , its hard to observe the unexpected property by itself , because its an ink .
So , weve prepared a video to show it applied to paper .
As this paper is bending , the resistance of the ink changes .
So with simple electronics , you can detect how much the page is being bent .
Now , to think about the potential for this , think of all the places ink is supplied : on business cards , on the back of cereal boxes , board games . Any place you use ink , you could change the way you interact with it .
ZK : So my favorite idea for this is to apply the ink to a book .
This could totally change the way that you interface with paper .
You see the dark line on the side and the top . As you turn the pages of the book , the book can actually detect what page youre on , based on the curvature of the pages .
In addition , if you were to fold in one of the corners , then you could program the book to actually email you the text on the page for your notes .
For our last technology , we worked again with Roman and his team at the Directors Bureau to develop a commercial from the future to explain how it works .
Old Milk Carton : Oh yeah , it smells good .
Who are you ?
New Milk Carton : Im New Milk .
OMC : I used to smell like you .
Fresh Watch , from Inventables Dairy Farms .
Packaging that changes color when your milks gone off .
Dont let milk spoil your morning .
ZK : Now , this technology was developed by these two guys : Professor Ken Suslick and Neil Rakow , of the University of Illinois .
Now the way it works : theres a matrix of color dyes .
And these dyes change color in response to odors .
So the smell of vanilla , that might change the four on the left to brown and the one on the right to yellow . This matrix can produce thousands of different color combinations to represent thousands of different smells .
But like in the milk commercial , if you know what odor you want to detect , then they can formulate a specific dye to detect just that odor .
ZK : Right . It was that that started a conversation with Professor Suslick and myself , and he was explaining to me the things that this is making possible , beyond just detecting spoiled food . Its really where the significance of it lies .
His company actually did a survey of firemen all across the country to try to learn , how are they currently testing the air when they respond to an emergency scene ?
And he kind of comically explained that time after time , what the firemen would say is : they would rush to the scene of the crime ; they would look around ; if there were no dead policemen , it was OK to go .
I mean , this is a true story . Theyre using policemen as canaries .
But more seriously , they determined that you could develop a device that can smell better than the humans , and say if its safe for the firemen .
In addition , hes spun off a company from the University called ChemSensing , where theyre working on medical equipment .
So , a patient can come in and actually blow into their device .
By detecting the odor of particular bacteria , or viruses , or even lung cancer , the dots will change and they can use software to analyze the results .
This can radically improve the way that doctors diagnose patients .
Currently , theyre using a method of trial and error , but this could tell you precisely what disease you have .
So that was the six we had for you today , but I hope youre starting to see why we find these things so fascinating .
Because every one of these six changed our understanding of what was possible in the world . Prior to seeing this , we would have assumed : a 10 - foot pole couldnt fit in your pocket ; something as inexpensive as ink couldnt sense the way paper is being bent ; every one of these things  -  -  and were constantly trying to find more .
ZK : This is something that Keith and I really enjoy doing .
Im sure its obvious to you now , but it was actually yesterday that I was reminded of why . I was having a conversation with Steve Jurvetson , over downstairs by the escalators , and he was telling me that when Chris sent out that little box , one of the items in it was the hydrophobic sand  -  -  the sand that doesnt get wet . He said that he was playing with it with his son .
And you know , his son was mesmerized , because he would dunk it in the water , he would take it out and it was bone dry . A few weeks later , he said that his son was playing with a lock of his mothers hair , and he noticed that there were some drops of water on the hair .
And he took the thing and he looked up to Steve and he said ,  Look , hydrophobic string . 
I mean , after hearing that story  -  -  that really summed it up for me .
Thank you very much .
Thank you .
Rose George : Lets talk crap . Seriously .
Its 2013 , yet 2.5 billion people in the world have no access to a basic sanitary toilet . And when theres no loo , where do you poo ? In the street , probably near your water and food sources  -  -  causing untold death and disease from contamination . Get ready for a blunt , funny , powerful talk from journalist Rose George about a once - unmentionable problem .
Lets talk dirty .
A few years ago , oddly enough , I needed the bathroom , and I found one , a public bathroom , and I went into the stall , and I prepared to do what Id done most of my life : use the toilet , flush the toilet , forget about the toilet .
And for some reason that day , instead , I asked myself a question , and it was , where does this stuff go ?
And with that question , I found myself plunged into the world of sanitation  -  -  theres more coming  -  -  — sanitation , toilets and poop , and I have yet to emerge .
And thats because its such an enraging , yet engaging place to be .
To go back to that toilet , it wasnt a particularly fancy toilet , it wasnt as nice as this one from the World Toilet Organization .
Thats the other WTO .
But it had a lockable door , it had privacy , it had water , it had soap so I could wash my hands , and I did because Im a woman , and we do that .
But that day , when I asked that question , I learned something , and that was that Id grown up thinking that a toilet like that was my right , when in fact its a privilege .
2.5 billion people worldwide have no adequate toilet .
They dont have a bucket or a box .
Forty percent of the world with no adequate toilet .
And they have to do what this little boy is doing by the side of the Mumbai Airport expressway , which is called open defecation , or poo - pooing in the open .
And he does that every day , and every day , probably , that guy in the picture walks on by , because he sees that little boy , but he doesnt see him .
But he should , because the problem with all that poop lying around is that poop carries passengers .
Fifty communicable diseases like to travel in human shit .
All those things , the eggs , the cysts , the bacteria , the viruses , all those can travel in one gram of human feces .
How ? Well , that little boy will not have washed his hands .
Hes barefoot . Hell run back into his house , and he will contaminate his drinking water and his food and his environment with whatever diseases he may be carrying by fecal particles that are on his fingers and feet .
In what I call the flushed - and - plumbed world that most of us in this room are lucky to live in , the most common symptoms associated with those diseases , diarrhea , is now a bit of a joke .
Its the runs , the Hershey squirts , the squits .
Where I come from , we call it Delhi belly , as a legacy of empire .
But if you search for a stock photo of diarrhea in a leading photo image agency , this is the picture that you come up with .
Still not sure about the bikini .
And heres another image of diarrhea .
This is Marie Saylee , nine months old .
You cant see her , because shes buried under that green grass in a little village in Liberia , because she died in three days from diarrhea  -  -  the Hershey squirts , the runs , a joke .
And thats her dad .
But she wasnt alone that day , because 4,000 other children died of diarrhea , and they do every day .
Diarrhea is the second biggest killer of children worldwide , and youve probably been asked to care about things like HIV / AIDS or T.B . or measles , but diarrhea kills more children than all those three things put together .
Its a very potent weapon of mass destruction .
And the cost to the world is immense : 260 billion dollars lost every year on the losses to poor sanitation .
These are cholera beds in Haiti .
Youll have heard of cholera , but we dont hear about diarrhea .
It gets a fraction of the attention and funding given to any of those other diseases .
But we know how to fix this .
We know , because in the mid - 19th century , wonderful Victorian engineers installed systems of sewers and wastewater treatment and the flush toilet , and disease dropped dramatically .
Child mortality dropped by the most it had ever dropped in history .
The flush toilet was voted the best medical advance of the last 200 years by the readers of the British Medical Journal , and they were choosing over the Pill , anesthesia , and surgery .
Its a wonderful waste disposal device .
But I think that its so good — it doesnt smell , we can put it in our house , we can lock it behind a door — and I think weve locked it out of conversation too .
We dont have a neutral word for it .
Poops not particularly adequate .
Shit offends people . Feces is too medical .
Because I cant explain otherwise , when I look at the figures , whats going on .
We know how to solve diarrhea and sanitation , but if you look at the budgets of countries , developing and developed , youll think theres something wrong with the math , because youll expect absurdities like Pakistan spending 47 times more on its military than it does on water and sanitation , even though 150,000 children die of diarrhea in Pakistan every year .
But then you look at that already minuscule water and sanitation budget , and 75 to 90 percent of it will go on clean water supply , which is great ; we all need water .
No ones going to refuse clean water .
But the humble latrine , or flush toilet , reduces disease by twice as much as just putting in clean water .
Think about it . That little boy whos running back into his house , he may have a nice , clean fresh water supply , but hes got dirty hands that hes going to contaminate his water supply with .
And I think that the real waste of human waste is that we are wasting it as a resource and as an incredible trigger for development , because these are a few things that toilets and poop itself can do for us .
So a toilet can put a girl back in school .
Twenty - five percent of girls in India drop out of school because they have no adequate sanitation .
Theyve been used to sitting through lessons for years and years holding it in .
Weve all done that , but they do it every day , and when they hit puberty and they start menstruating , it just gets too much .
And I understand that . Who can blame them ?
So if you met an educationalist and said ,  I can improve education attendance rates by 25 percent with just one simple thing ,  youd make a lot of friends in education .
Thats not the only thing it can do for you .
Poop can cook your dinner .
Its got nutrients in it .
We ingest nutrients . We excrete nutrients as well .
We dont keep them all .
75 percent of their cooking fuel in their prison system from the contents of prisoners bowels .
So these are a bunch of inmates in a prison in Butare .
Theyre genocidal inmates , most of them , and theyre stirring the contents of their own latrines , because if you put poop in a sealed environment , in a tank , pretty much like a stomach , then , pretty much like a stomach , it gives off gas , and you can cook with it .
And you might think its just good karma to see these guys stirring shit , but its also good economic sense , because theyre saving a million dollars a year .
Theyre cutting down on deforestation , and theyve found a fuel supply that is inexhaustible , infinite and free at the point of production .
Its not just in the poor world that poop can save lives .
Heres a woman whos about to get a dose of the brown stuff in those syringes , which is what you think it is , except not quite , because its actually donated .
There is now a new career path called stool donor .
Its like the new sperm donor .
Because she has been suffering from a superbug called C . diff , and its resistant to antibiotics in many cases .
Shes been suffering for years .
She gets a dose of healthy human feces , and the cure rate for this procedure is 94 percent .
Its astonishing , but hardly anyone is still doing it .
Maybe its the ick factor .
Thats okay , because theres a team of research scientists in Canada who have now created a stool sample , a fake stool sample which is called RePOOPulate .
So youd be thinking by now , okay , the solutions simple , we give everyone a toilet .
And this is where it gets really interesting , because its not that simple , because we are not simple .
So the really interesting , exciting work  -  -  this is the engaging bit  -  -  in sanitation is that we need to understand human psychology .
We need to understand software as well as just giving someone hardware .
Theyve found in many developing countries that governments have gone in and given out free latrines and gone back a few years later and found that theyve got lots of new goat sheds or temples or spare rooms with their owners happily walking past them and going over to the open defecating ground .
So the idea is to manipulate human emotion .
Its been done for decades . The soap companies did it in the early 20th century .
They tried selling soap as healthy . No one bought it .
They tried selling it as sexy . Everyone bought it .
In India now theres a campaign which persuades young brides not to marry into families that dont have a toilet .
Its called  No Loo , No I Do . 
And in case you think that posters just propaganda , heres Priyanka , 23 years old .
I met her last October in India , and she grew up in a conservative environment .
She grew up in a rural village in a poor area of India , and she was engaged at 14 , and then at 21 or so , she moved into her in - laws house .
And she was horrified to get there and find that they didnt have a toilet .
Shed grown up with a latrine .
It was no big deal , but it was a latrine .
And the first night she was there , she was told that at 4 oclock in the morning  -  -  her mother - in - law got her up , told her to go outside and go and do it in the dark in the open .
And she was scared . She was scared of drunks hanging around .
She was scared of snakes . She was scared of rape .
After three days , she did an unthinkable thing .
She left .
And if you know anything about rural India , youll know thats an unspeakably courageous thing to do .
But not just that .
She got her toilet , and now she goes around all the other villages in India persuading other women to do the same thing .
Its what I call social contagion , and its really powerful and really exciting .
Another version of this , another village in India near where Priyanka lives is this village , called Lakara , and about a year ago , it had no toilets whatsoever .
Kids were dying of diarrhea and cholera .
Some visitors came , using various behavioral change tricks like putting out a plate of food and a plate of shit and watching the flies go one to the other .
Somehow , people whod been thinking that what they were doing was not disgusting at all suddenly thought ,  Oops . 
Not only that , but they were ingesting their neighbors shit .
Thats what really made them change their behavior .
So this woman , this boys mother installed this latrine in a few hours .
Her entire life , shed been using the banana field behind , but she installed the latrine in a few hours .
It cost nothing . Its going to save that boys life .
So when I get despondent about the state of sanitation , even though these are pretty exciting times because weve got the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation reinventing the toilet , which is great , weve got Matt Damon going on bathroom strike , which is great for humanity , very bad for his colon .
But there are things to worry about .
Its the most off - track Millennium Development Goal .
Its about 50 or so years off track .
Were not going to meet targets , providing people with sanitation at this rate .
So when I get sad about sanitation , I think of Japan , because Japan 70 years ago was a nation of people who used pit latrines and wiped with sticks , and now its a nation of what are called Woshurettos , washlet toilets .
They have in - built bidet nozzles for a lovely , hands - free cleaning experience , and they have various other features like a heated seat and an automatic lid - raising device which is known as the  marriage - saver . 
But most importantly , what they have done in Japan , which I find so inspirational , is theyve brought the toilet out from behind the locked door .
Theyve made it conversational .
People go out and upgrade their toilet .
They talk about it . Theyve sanitized it .
I hope that we can do that . Its not a difficult thing to do .
All we really need to do is look at this issue as the urgent , shameful issue that it is .
And dont think that its just in the poor world that things are wrong .
Our sewers are crumbling .
Things are going wrong here too .
The solution to all of this is pretty easy .
Im going to make your lives easy this afternoon and just ask you to do one thing , and thats to go out , protest , speak about the unspeakable , and talk shit .
Thank you .
Frank Gehry : My days as a young rebel
Before he was a legend , architect Frank Gehry takes a whistlestop tour of his early work , from his house in Venice Beach to the American Center in Paris , which was under construction when he gave this talk .
Im going to go right into the slides .
And all Im going to try and prove to you with these slides is that I do just very straight stuff .
And my ideas are  -  -  in my head , anyway  -  -  theyre very logical and relate to whats going on and problem solving for clients .
I either convince clients at the end that I solve their problems , or I really do solve their problems , because usually they seem to like it .
Let me go right into the slides .
Can you turn off the light ? Down .
I like to be in the dark .
I dont want you to see what Im doing up here .
Anyway , I did this house in Santa Monica , and it got a lot of notoriety .
In fact , it appeared in a porno comic book , which is the slide on the right .
This is in Venice .
I just show it because I want you to know Im concerned about context .
On the left - hand side , I had the context of those little houses , and I tried to build a building that fit into that context .
When people take pictures of these buildings out of that context they look really weird , and my premise is that they make a lot more sense when theyre photographed or seen in that space .
And then , once I deal with the context , I then try to make a place thats comfortable and private and fairly serene , as I hope youll find that slide on the right .
And then I did a law school for Loyola in downtown L.A .
I was concerned about making a place for the study of law .
And we continue to work with this client .
The building on the right at the top is now under construction .
The garage on the right  -  -  the gray structure  -  -  will be torn down , finally , and several small classrooms will be placed along this avenue that weve created , this campus .
And it all related to the clients and the students from the very first meeting saying they felt denied a place .
They wanted a sense of place .
And so the whole idea here was to create that kind of space in downtown , in a neighborhood that was difficult to fit into .
And it was my theory , or my point of view , that one didnt upstage the neighborhood  -  -  one made accommodations .
I tried to be inclusive , to include the buildings in the neighborhood , whether they were buildings I liked or not .
In the 60s I started working with paper furniture and made a bunch of stuff that was very successful in Bloomingdales .
We even made flooring , walls and everything , out of cardboard .
And the success of it threw me for a loop .
I couldnt deal with the success of furniture  -  -  I wasnt secure enough as an architect  -  -  and so I closed it all up and made furniture that nobody would like .
So , nobody would like this .
And it was in this , preliminary to these pieces of furniture , that Ricky and I worked on furniture by the slice .
And after we failed , I just kept failing .
The piece on the left  -  -  and that ultimately led to the piece on the right  -  -  happened when the kid that was working on this took one of those long strings of stuff and folded it up to put it in the wastebasket .
And I put a piece of tape around it , as you see there , and realized you could sit on it , and it had a lot of resilience and strength and so on .
So , it was an accidental discovery .
I got into fish .
I mean , the story I tell is that I got mad at postmodernism  -  -  at po - mo  -  -  and said that fish were 500 million years earlier than man , and if youre going to go back , we might as well go back to the beginning .
And so I started making these funny things .
And they started to have a life of their own and got bigger  -  -  as the one glass at the Walker .
And then , I sliced off the head and the tail and everything and tried to translate what I was learning about the form of the fish and the movement .
And a lot of my architectural ideas that came from it  -  -  accidental , again  -  -  it was an intuitive kind of thing , and I just kept going with it , and made this proposal for a building , which was only a proposal .
I did this building in Japan .
I was taken out to dinner after the contract for this little restaurant was signed .
And I love sake and Kobe and all that stuff .
And after I got  -  -  I was really drunk  -  -  I was asked to do some sketches on napkins .
And I made some sketches on napkins  -  -  little boxes and Morandi - like things that I used to do .
And the client said ,  Why no fish ? 
And so I made a drawing with a fish , and I left Japan .
Three weeks later , I received a complete set of drawings saying wed won the competition .
Now , its hard to do . Its hard to translate a fish form , because theyre so beautiful  -  -  perfect  -  -  into a building or object like this .
And Oldenburg , who I work with a little once in a while , told me I couldnt do it , and so that made it even more exciting .
But he was right  -  -  I couldnt do the tail .
I started to get the head OK , but the tail I couldnt do .
It was pretty hard .
The thing on the right is a snake form , a ziggurat .
And I put them together , and you walk between them .
It was a dialog with the context again .
Now , if you saw a picture of this as it was published in Architectural Record  -  -  they didnt show the context , so you would think ,  God , what a pushy guy this is . 
But a friend of mine spent four hours wandering around here looking for this restaurant .
Couldnt find it .
So ...
As for craft and technology and all those things that youve all been talking about , I was thrown for a complete loop .
This was built in six months .
The way we sent drawings to Japan : we used the magic computer in Michigan that does carved models , and we used to make foam models , which that thing scanned .
We made the drawings of the fish and the scales .
And when I got there , everything was perfect  -  -  except the tail .
So , I decided to cut off the head and the tail .
And I made the object on the left for my show at the Walker .
And its one of the nicest pieces Ive ever made , I think .
And then Jay Chiat , a friend and client , asked me to do his headquarters building in L.A .
For reasons we dont want to talk about , it got delayed .
Toxic waste , I guess , is the key clue to that one .
And so we built a temporary building  -  -  Im getting good at temporary  -  -  and we put a conference room in thats a fish .
And , finally , Jay dragged me to my hometown , Toronto , Canada .
And there is a story  -  -  its a real story  -  -  about my grandmother buying a carp on Thursday , bringing it home , putting it in the bathtub when I was a kid .
I played with it in the evening .
When I went to sleep , the next day it wasnt there .
And the next night , we had gefilte fish .
And so I set up this interior for Jays offices and I made a pedestal for a sculpture .
And he didnt buy a sculpture , so I made one .
I went around Toronto and found a bathtub like my grandmothers , and I put the fish in .
It was a joke .
I play with funny people like  Claes  Oldenburg .
Weve been friends for a long time .
And weve started to work on things .
A few years ago , we did a performance piece in Venice , Italy , called  Il Corso del Coltello   -  -  the Swiss Army knife .
And most of the imagery is  -  -  Claes , but those two little boys are my sons , and they were Claes assistants in the play .
He was the Swiss Army knife .
He was a souvenir salesman who always wanted to be a painter , and I was Frankie P. Toronto .
P for Palladio .
Dressed up like the AT and T building by Claes  -  -  with a fish hat .
The highlight of the performance was at the end .
This beautiful object , the Swiss Army knife , which I get credit for participating in .
And I can tell you  -  -  its totally an Oldenburg .
I had nothing to do with it .
The only thing I did was , I made it possible for them to turn those blades so you could sail this thing in the canal , because I love sailing .
We made it into a sailing craft .
Ive been known to mess with things like chain link fencing .
I do it because its a curious thing in the culture , when things are made in such great quantities , absorbed in such great quantities , and theres so much denial about them .
People hate it .
And Im fascinated with that , which , like the paper furniture  -  -  its one of those materials .
And Im always drawn to that .
And so I did a lot of dirty things with chain link , which nobody will forgive me for .
But Claes made homage to it in the Loyola Law School .
And that chain link is really expensive .
Its in perspective and everything .
And then we did a camp together for children with cancer .
And you can see , we started making a building together .
Of course , the milk can is his .
But we were trying to collide our ideas , to put objects next to each other .
Like a Morandi  -  -  like the little bottles  -  -  composing them like a still life .
And it seemed to work as a way to put he and I together .
Then Jay Chiat asked me to do this building on this funny lot in Venice , and I started with this three - piece thing , and you entered in the middle .
And Jay asked me what I was going to do with the piece in the middle .
And he pushed that .
And one day I had a  -  -  oh , well , the other way .
I had the binoculars from Claes , and I put them there , and I could never get rid of them after that .
Oldenburg made the binoculars incredible when he sent me the first model of the real proposal .
It made my building look sick .
And it was this interaction between that kind of , up - the - ante stuff that became pretty interesting .
It led to the building on the left .
And I still think the Time magazine picture will be of the binoculars , you know , leaving out the  -  -  what the hell .
I use a lot of metal in my work , and I have a hard time connecting with the craft .
The whole thing about my house , the whole use of rough carpentry and everything , was the frustration with the crafts available .
I said ,  If I cant get the craft that I want , Ill use the craft I can get . 
There were plenty of models for that , in Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns , and many artists who were making beautiful art and sculpture with junk materials .
I went into the metal because it was a way of building a building that was a sculpture .
And it was all of one material , and the metal could go on the roof as well as the walls .
The metalworkers , for the most part , do ducts behind the ceilings and stuff .
I was given an opportunity to design an exhibit for the metalworkers unions of America and Canada in Washington , and I did it on the condition that they become my partners in the future and help me with all future metal buildings , etc . etc .
And its working very well to have these people , these craftsmen , interested in it .
I just tell the stories .
Its a way of connecting , at least , with some of those people that are so important to the realization of architecture .
The metal continued into a building  -  -  Herman Miller , in Sacramento .
And its just a complex of factory buildings .
And Herman Miller has this philosophy of having a place  -  -  a people place .
I mean , its kind of a trite thing to say , but it is real that they wanted to have a central place where the cafeteria would be , where the people would come and where the people working would interact .
So its out in the middle of nowhere , and you approach it .
Its copper and galvanize .
I used the galvanize and copper in a very light gauge , so it would buckle .
I spent a lot of time undoing Richard Meiers aesthetic .
Everybodys trying to get the panels perfect , and I always try to get them sloppy and fuzzy .
And they end up looking like stone .
This is the central area .
Theres a ramp .
And that little dome in there is a building by Stanley Tigerman .
Stanley was instrumental in my getting this job .
And when I was awarded the contract I , at the very beginning , asked the client if they would let Stanley do a cameo piece with me .
Because these were ideas that we were talking about , building things next to each other , making  -  -  its all about  a  metaphor for a city , maybe .
And so Stanley did the little dome thing .
And we did it over the phone and by fax .
He would send me a fax and show me something .
Hed made a building with a dome and he had a little tower .
I told him ,  No , no , thats too ongepotchket .
I dont want the tower . 
So he came back with a simpler building , but he put some funny details on it , and he moved it closer to my building .
And so I decided to put him in a depression .
I put him in a hole and made a kind of a hole that he sits in .
And so then he put two bridges  -  -  this all happened on the fax , going back and forth over a couple of weeks period .
And he put these two bridges with pink guardrails on it .
And so then I put this big billboard behind it .
And I call it ,  David and Goliath . 
And thats my cafeteria .
In Boston , we had that old building on the left .
It was a very prominent building off the freeway , and we added a floor and cleaned it up and fixed it up and used the kind of  -  -  I thought  -  -  the language of the neighborhood , which had these cornices , projecting cornices .
Mine got a little exuberant , but I used lead copper , which is a beautiful material , and it turns green in 100 years .
Instead of , like , copper in 10 or 15 .
We redid the side of the building and re - proportioned the windows so it sort of fit into the space .
And it surprised both Boston and myself that we got it approved , because they have very strict kind of design guideline , and they wouldnt normally think I would fit them .
The detailing was very careful with the lead copper and making panels and fitting it tightly into the fabric of the existing building .
In Barcelona , on Las Ramblas for some film festival , I did the Hollywood sign going and coming , made a building out of it , and they built it .
I flew in one night and took this picture .
But they made it a third smaller than my model without telling me .
And then more metal and some chain link in Santa Monica  -  -  a little shopping center .
And this is a laser laboratory at the University of Iowa , in which the fish comes back as an abstraction in the back .
Its the support labs , which , by some coincidence , required no windows .
And the shape fit perfectly .
I just joined the points .
In the curved part theres all the mechanical equipment .
That solid wall behind it is a pipe chase  -  -  a pipe canyon  -  -  and so it was an opportunity that I seized , because I didnt have to have any protruding ducts or vents or things in this form .
It gave me an opportunity to make a sculpture out of it .
This is a small house somewhere .
Theyve been building it so long I dont remember where it is .
Its in the West Valley .
And we started with the stream and built the house along the stream  -  -  dammed it up to make a lake .
These are the models .
The reality , with the lake  -  -  the workmanship is pretty bad .
And it reminded me why I play defensively in things like my house .
When you have to do something really cheaply , its hard to get perfect corners and stuff .
That big metal thing is a passage , and in it is  -  -  you go downstairs into the living room and then down into the bedroom , which is on the right .
Its kind of like a whole built town .
I was asked to do a hospital for schizophrenic adolescents at Yale .
I thought it was fitting for me to be doing that .
This is a house next to a Philip Johnson house in Minnesota .
The owners had a dilemma  -  -  they asked Philip to do it .
He was too busy .
He didnt recommend me , by the way .
We ended up having to make it a sculpture , because the dilemma was , how do you build a building that doesnt look like the language ?
Is it going to look like this beautiful estate is sub - divided ?
Etc . etc .
Youve got the idea .
And so we finally ended up making it .
These people are art collectors .
And we finally made it so it appears very sculptural from the main house and all the windows are on the other side .
And the building is very sculptural as you walk around it .
Its made of metal and the brown stuff is Fin - Ply  -  -  its that formed lumber from Finland .
We used it at Loyola on the chapel , and it didnt work .
I keep trying to make it work .
In this case we learned how to detail it .
In Cleveland , theres Burnham Mall , on the left .
Its never been finished .
Going out to the lake , you can see all those new buildings we built .
And we had the opportunity to build a building on this site .
Theres a railroad track .
This is the city hall over here somewhere , and the courthouse .
And the centerline of the mall goes out .
Burnham had designed a railroad station that was never built , and so we followed .
Sohio is on the axis here , and we followed the axis , and theyre two kind of goalposts .
And this is our building , which is a corporate headquarters for an insurance company .
We collaborated with Oldenburg and put the newspaper on top , folded .
The health club is fastened to the garage with a C - clamp , for Cleveland .
You drive down .
So its about a 10 - story C - clamp .
And all this stuff at the bottom is a museum , and an idea for a very fancy automobile entry .
This owner has a pet peeve about bad automobile entries .
And this would be a hotel .
So , the centerline of this thing  -  -  wed preserve it , and it would start to work with the scale of the new buildings by Pelli and Kohn Pederson Fox , etc . , that are underway .
Its hard to do high - rise .
I feel much more comfortable down here .
This is a piece of property in Brentwood .
And a long time ago , about 82 or something , after my house  -  -  I designed a house for myself that would be a village of several pavilions around a courtyard  -  -  and the owner of this lot worked for me and built that actual model on the left .
And she came back , I guess wealthier or something  -  -  something happened  -  -  and asked me to design a house for her on this site .
And following that basic idea of the village , we changed it as we got into it .
I locked the house into the site by cutting the back end  -  -  here you see on the photographs of the site  -  -  slicing into it and putting all the bathrooms and dressing rooms like a retaining wall , creating a lower level zone for the master bedroom , which I designed like a kind of a barge , looking like a boat .
And thats it , built .
The dome was a request from the client .
She wanted a dome somewhere in the house .
She didnt care where .
When you sleep in this bedroom , I hope  -  -  I mean , I havent slept in it yet .
Ive offered to marry her so I could sleep there , but she said I didnt have to do that .
But when youre in that room , you feel like youre on a kind of barge on some kind of lake .
And its very private .
The landscape is being built around to create a private garden .
And then up above theres a garden on this side of the living room , and one on the other side .
These arent focused very well .
I dont know how to do it from here .
Focus the one on the right .
Its up there .
Left  -  -  its my right .
Anyway , you enter into a garden with a beautiful grove of trees .
Thats the living room .
Servants quarters .
A guest bedroom , which has this dome with marble on it .
And then you enter into the living room and then so on .
This is the bedroom .
You come down from this level along the stairway , and you enter the bedroom here , going into the lake .
And the bed is back in this space , with windows looking out onto the lake .
These Stonehenge things were designed to give foreground and to create a greater depth in this shallow lot .
The material is lead copper , like in the building in Boston .
And so it was an intent to make this small piece of land  -  -  its 100 by 250  -  -  into a kind of an estate by separating these areas and making the living room and dining room into this pavilion with a high space in it .
And this happened by accident that I got this right on axis with the dining room table .
It looks like I got a Baldessari painting for free .
But the idea is , the windows are all placed so you see pieces of the house outside .
Eventually this will be screened  -  -  these trees will come up  -  -  and it will be very private .
And you feel like youre in your own kind of village .
This is for Michael Eisner  -  -  Disney .
Were doing some work for him .
And this is in Anaheim , California , and its a freeway building .
You go under this bridge at about 65 miles an hour , and theres another bridge here .
And youre through this room in a split second , and the building will sort of reflect that .
On the backside , its much more humane  -  -  entrance , dining hall , etc .
And then this thing here  -  -  Im hoping as you drive by youll hear the picket fence effect of the sound hitting it .
Kind of a fun thing to do .
Im doing a building in Switzerland , Basel , which is an office building for a furniture company .
And we struggled with the image .
These are the early studies , but they have to sell furniture to normal people , so if I did the building and it was too fancy , then people might say ,  Well , the furniture looks OK in his thing , but no , it aint going to look good in my normal building . 
So weve made a kind of pragmatic slab in the second phase here , and weve taken the conference facilities and made a villa out of them so that the communal space is very sculptural and separate .
And youre looking at it from the offices and you create a kind of interaction between these pieces .
This is in Paris , along the Seine .
Palais des Sports , the Gare de Lyon over here .
The Minister of Finance  -  -  the guy that moved from the Louvre  -  -  goes in here .
Theres a new library across the river .
And back in here , in this already treed park , were doing a very dense building called the American Center , which has a theater , apartments , dance school , an art museum , restaurants and all kinds of  -  -  its a very dense program  -  -  bookstores , etc .
In a very tight , small  -  -  this is the ground level .
And the French have this extraordinary way of screwing things up by taking a beautiful site and cutting the corner off .
They call it the plan coupe .
And I struggled with that thing  -  -  how to get around the corner .
These are the models for it .
I showed you the other model , the one  -  -  this is the way I organized myself so I could make the drawing  -  -  so I understood the problem .
I was trying to get around this plan coupe  -  -  how do you do it ?
Apartments , etc .
And these are the kind of study models we did .
And the one on the left is pretty awful .
You can see why I was ready to commit suicide when this one was built .
But out of it came finally this resolution , where the elevator piece worked frontally to this , parallel to this street , and also parallel to here .
And then this kind of twist , with this balcony and the skirt , kind of like a ballerina lifting her skirt to let you into the foyer .
The restaurants here  -  -  the apartments and the theater , etc .
So it would all be built in stone , in French limestone , except for this metal piece .
And it faces into a park .
And the idea was to make this express the energy of this .
On the side facing the street its much more normal , except I slipped a few mansards down , so that coming on the point , these housing units made a gesture to the corner .
And this will be some kind of high - tech billboard .
If any of you guys have any ideas for it , please contact me .
I dont know what to do .
Jay Chiat is a glutton for punishment , and he hired me to do a house for him in the Hamptons .
And its got a fish .
And I keep thinking ,  This is going to be the last fish . 
Its like a drug addict .
I say ,  Im not going to do it anymore  -  -  I dont want to do it anymore  -  -  Im not going to do it . 
And then I do it .
There it is .
But its the living room .
And this piece here is  -  -  I dont know what it is .
I just added it so that wed have enough money in the budget so we could take something out .
This is Euro Disney , and Ive worked with all of the guys that presented to you earlier .
Weve had a lot of fun working together .
I think Im from Mars for them , and they are for me , but somehow we all manage to work together , and I think , productively .
So far .
This is a shopping thing .
You come into the Magic Kingdom and the hotel that Tony Baxters group is doing out here .
And then this is a kind of a shopping mall , with a rodeo and restaurants .
And another restaurant .
What I did  -  -  because of the Paris skies being quite dull , I made a light grid thats perpendicular to the train station , to the route of the train .
It looks like its kind of been there , and then crashed all these simpler forms into it .
The light grid will have a light , be lit up at night and give a kind of light ceiling .
In Switzerland  -  -  Germany , actually  -  -  on the Rhine across from Basel , we did a furniture factory and a furniture museum .
And I tried to  -  -  theres a Nick Grimshaw building over here , theres an Oldenburg sculpture over here  -  -  I tried to make a relationship urbanistically .
And I dont gave good slides to show  -  -  its just been completed  -  -  but this piece here is this building , and these pieces here and here .
And as you pass by its always part  -  -  you see it as all of these pieces accrue and become part of an overall neighborhood .
Its plaster and just zinc .
And you wonder , if this is a museum , what its going to be like inside ?
If its going to be so busy and crazy that you wouldnt show anything , and just wait .
Im so cunning and clever  -  -  I made it quiet and wonderful .
But on the outside it does scream out at you a bit .
Its actually basically three square rooms with a couple of skylights and stuff .
And from the building in the back , you see it as an iceberg floating by in the hills .
I know Im over time .
See , that skylight goes down and becomes that one .
So its pretty quiet inside .
This is the Disney Hall  -  -  the concert hall .
Its a complicated project .
It has a chamber hall .
Its related to an existing Chandler Pavilion that was built with a lot of love and tears and caring .
And its not a great building , but I approached it optimistically , that we would make a compositional relationship between us that would strengthen both of us .
And the plan of this  -  -  its a concert hall .
This is the foyer , which is kind of a garden structure .
Theres commercial at the ground floor .
These are offices , which , really , in the competition , we didnt have to design .
But finally , theres a hotel there .
These were the kind of relationships made to the Chandler , composing these elevations together and relating them to the buildings that existed  -  -  to MOCA , etc .
The acoustician in the competition gave us criteria , which led to this compartmentalized scheme , which we found out after the competition would not work at all .
But everybody liked these forms and liked the space , and so thats one of the problems of a competition .
You have to then try and get that back in some way .
And we studied many models .
This was our original model .
These were the three buildings that were the ideal  -  -  the Concertgebouw , Boston and Berlin .
Everybody liked the surround .
Actually , this is the smallest hall in size , and it has more seats than any of these because it has double balconies .
Our client doesnt want balconies , so  -  -  and when we met our new acoustician , he told us this was the right shape or this was the right shape .
And we tried many shapes , trying to get the energy of the original design within an acoustical , acceptable format .
We finally settled on a shape that was the proportion of the Concertgebouw with the sloping outside walls , which the acoustician said were crucial to this and later decided they werent , but now we have them .
And our idea is to make the seating carriage very sculptural and out of wood and like a big boat sitting in this plaster room .
Thats the idea .
And the corners would have skylights and these columns would be structural .
And the nice thing about introducing columns is they give you a kind of sense of proscenium from wherever you sit , and create intimacy .
Now , this is not a final design  -  -  these are just on the way to being  -  -  and so I wouldnt take it literally , except the feeling of the space .
We studied the acoustics with laser stuff , and they bounce them off this and see where it all works .
But you get the sense of the hall in section .
Most halls come straight down into a proscenium .
In this case were opening it back up and getting skylights in the four corners .
And so it will be quite a different shape .
The original building , because it was frog - like , fit nicely on the site and cranked itself well .
When you get into a box , its harder to do it  -  -  and here we are , struggling with how to put the hotel in .
And this is a teapot I designed for Alessi .
I just stuck it on there .
But this is how I do work . I do take pieces and bits and look at it and struggle with it and cut it away .
And of course its not going to look like that , but it is the crazy way I tend to work .
And then finally , in L.A . I was asked to do a sculpture at the foot of Interstate Bank Tower , the highest building in L.A .
Larry Halprin is doing the stairs .
And I was asked to do a fish , and so I did a snake .
Its a public space , and I made it kind of a garden structure , and you can go in it .
Its a kiva , and Larrys putting some water in there , and it works much better than a fish .
In Barcelona I was asked to do a fish , and were working on that , at the foot of a Ritz - Carlton Tower being done by Skidmore , Owings and Merrill .
And the Ritz - Carlton Tower is being designed with exposed steel , non - fire proof , much like those old gas tanks .
And so we took the language of this exposed steel and used it , perverted it , into the form of the fish , and created a kind of a 19th - century contraption that looks like , that will sit  -  -  this is the beach and the harbor out in front , and this is really a shopping center with department stores .
And we split these bridges .
Originally , this was all solid with a hole in it .
We cut them loose and made several bridges and created a kind of a foreground for this hotel .
We showed this to the hotel people the other day , and they were terrified and said that nobody would come to the Ritz - Carlton anymore , because of this fish .
And finally , I just threw these in  -  -  Lou Danziger .
I didnt expect Lou Danziger to be here , but this is a building I did for him in 1964 , I think .
A little studio  -  -  and its sadly for sale .
Time goes on .
And this is my son working with me on a small fast - food thing .
He designed the robot as the cashier , and the head moves , and I did the rest of it .
And the food wasnt as good as the stuff , and so it failed .
It should have been the other way around  -  -  the food should have been good first .
It didnt work .
Thank you very much .
Nicholas Negroponte : Taking OLPC to Colombia
TED follows Nicholas Negroponte to Colombia as he delivers laptops inside territory once controlled by guerrillas . His partner ? Colombias Defense Department , who see One Laptop per Child as an investment in the region .
Its amazing , when you meet a head of state and you say ,  What is your most precious natural resource ?   -  -  they will not say children at first .
And then when you say children , they will pretty quickly agree with you .
: Were traveling today with the Minister of Defense of Colombia , head of the army and the head of the police , and were dropping off 650 laptops today to children who have no television , no telephone and have been in a community cut off from the rest of the world for the past 40 years .
The importance of delivering laptops to this region is connecting kids who have otherwise been unconnected because of the FARC , the guerrillas that started off 40 years ago as a political movement and then became a drug movement .
There are one billion children in the world , and 50 percent of them dont have electricity at home or at school .
And in some countries  -  -  let me pick Afghanistan  -  -  75 percent of the little girls dont go to school .
And I dont mean that they drop out of school in the third or fourth grade  -  -  they dont go .
So in the three years since I talked at TED and showed a prototype , its gone from an idea to a real laptop .
We have half a million laptops today in the hands of children .
We have about a quarter of a million in transit to those and other children , and then there are another quarter of a million more that are being ordered at this moment .
So , in rough numbers , there are a million laptops .
Thats smaller than I predicted  -  -  I predicted three to 10 million  -  -  but is still a very large number .
In Colombia , we have about 3,000 laptops .
Its the Minister of Defense with whom were working , not the Minister of Education , because it is seen as a strategic defense issue in the sense of liberating these zones that had been completely closed off , in which the people who had been causing , if you will , 40 years worth of bombings and kidnappings and assassinations lived .
And suddenly , the kids have connected laptops .
Theyve leapfrogged .
The change is absolutely monumental , because its not just opening it up , but its opening it up to the rest of the world .
So yes , theyre building roads , yes , theyre putting in telephone , yes , there will be television .
But the kids six to 12 years old are surfing the Internet in Spanish and in local languages , so the children grow up with access to information , with a window into the rest of the world .
Before , they were closed off .
Interestingly enough , in other countries , it will be the Minister of Finance who sees it as an engine of economic growth .
And that engine is going to see the results in 20 years .
Its not going to happen , you know , in one year , but its an important , deeply economic and cultural change that happens through children .
Thirty - one countries in total are involved , and in the case of Uruguay , half the children already have them , and by the middle of 2009 , every single child in Uruguay will have a laptop  -  -  a little green laptop .
Now what are some of the results ?
Some of the results that go across every single country include teachers saying they have never loved teaching so much , and reading comprehension measured by third parties  -  -  not by us  -  -  skyrockets .
Probably the most important thing we see is children teaching parents .
They own the laptops . They take them home .
And so when I met with three children from the schools , who had traveled all day to come to Bogota , one of the three children brought her mother .
And the reason she brought her mother is that this six - year - old child had been teaching her mother how to read and write .
Her mother had not gone to primary school .
And this is such an inversion , and such a wonderful example of children being the agents of change .
So now , in closing , people say , now why laptops ?
Laptops are a luxury ; its like giving them iPods . No .
The reason you want laptops is that the word is education , not laptop .
This is an education project , not a laptop project .
They need to learn learning . And then , just think  -  -  they can have , lets say , 100 books .
In a village , you have 100 laptops , each with a different set of 100 books , and so that village suddenly has 10,000 books .
You and I didnt have 10,000 books when we went to primary school .
Sometimes school is under a tree , or in many cases , the teacher has only a fifth - grade education , so you need a collaborative model of learning , not just building more schools and training more teachers , which you have to do anyway .
So were once again doing  Give One , Get One . 
Last year , we ran a  Give One , Get One  program , and it generated over 100,000 laptops that we were then able to give free .
And by being a zero - dollar laptop , we can go to countries that cant afford it at all .
And thats what we did . We went to Haiti , we went to Rwanda , Afghanistan , Ethiopia , Mongolia .
Places that are not markets , seeding it with the principles of saturation , connectivity , low ages , etc .
And then we can actually roll out large numbers .
So think of it this way : think of it as inoculating children against ignorance .
And think of the laptop as a vaccine .
You dont vaccinate a few children .
You vaccinate all the children in an area .
Nate Silver : Does racism affect how you vote ?
Nate Silver has data that answers big questions about race in politics . For instance , in the 2008 presidential race , did Obamas skin color actually keep him from getting votes in some parts of the country ? Stats and myths collide in this fascinating talk that ends with a remarkable insight .
I want to talk about the election .
For the first time in the United States , a predominantly white group of voters voted for an African - American candidate for President .
And in fact Barack Obama did quite well .
He won 375 electoral votes .
And he won about 70 million popular votes more than any other presidential candidate  -  -  of any race , of any party  -  -  in history .
If you compare how Obama did against how John Kerry had done four years earlier  -  -  Democrats really like seeing this transition here , where almost every state becomes bluer , becomes more democratic  -  -  even states Obama lost , like out west , those states became more blue .
In the south , in the northeast , almost everywhere but with a couple of exceptions here and there .
One exception is in Massachusetts .
That was John Kerrys home state .
No big surprise , Obama couldnt do better than Kerry there .
Or in Arizona , which is John McCains home , Obama didnt have much improvement .
But there is also this part of the country , kind of in the middle region here .
This kind of Arkansas , Tennessee , Oklahoma , West Virginia region .
Now if you look at 96 , Bill Clinton  -  -  the last Democrat to actually win  -  -  how he did in 96 , you see real big differences in this part of the country right here , the kind of Appalachians , Ozarks , highlands region , as I call it : 20 or 30 point swings from how Bill Clinton did in 96 to how Obama did in 2008 .
Yes Bill Clinton was from Arkansas , but these are very , very profound differences .
So , when we think about parts of the country like Arkansas , you know .
There is a book written called ,  Whats the Matter with Kansas ? 
But really the question here  -  -  Obama did relatively well in Kansas .
He lost badly but every Democrat does .
He lost no worse than most people do .
But yeah , whats the matter with Arkansas ?
And when we think of Arkansas we tend to have pretty negative connotations .
We think of a bunch of rednecks , quote , unquote , with guns .
And we think people like this probably dont want to vote for people who look like this and are named Barack Obama .
We think its a matter of race . And is this fair ?
Are we kind of stigmatizing people from Arkansas , and this part of the country ?
And the answer is : it is at least partially fair .
We know that race was a factor , and the reason why we know that is because we asked those people .
Actually we didnt ask them , but when they conducted exit polls in every state , in 37 states , out of the 50 , they asked a question , that was pretty direct , about race .
They asked this question .
In deciding your vote for President today , was the race of the candidate a factor ?
Were looking for people that said ,  Yes , race was a factor ; moreover it was an important factor , in my decision ,  and people who voted for John McCain as a result of that factor , maybe in combination with other factors , and maybe alone .
Were looking for this behavior among white voters or , really , non - black voters .
So you see big differences in different parts of the country on this question .
In Louisiana , about one in five white voters said ,  Yes , one of the big reasons why I voted against Barack Obama is because he was an African - American . 
If those people had voted for Obama , even half of them , Obama would have won Louisiana safely .
Same is true with , I think , all of these states you see on the top of the list .
Meanwhile , California , New York , we can say ,  Oh were enlightened  but you know , certainly a much lower incidence of this admitted , I suppose , manifestation of racially - based voting .
Here is the same data on a map .
You kind of see the relationship between the redder states of where more people responded and said ,  Yes , Barack Obamas race was a problem for me . 
You see , comparing the map to 96 , you see an overlap here .
This really seems to explain why Barack Obama did worse in this one part of the country .
So we have to ask why .
Is racism predictable in some way ?
Is there something driving this ?
Is it just about some weird stuff that goes on in Arkansas that we dont understand , and Kentucky ?
Or are there more systematic factors at work ?
And so we can look at a bunch of different variables .
These are things that economists and political scientists look at all the time  -  -  things like income , and religion , education .
Which of these seem to drive this manifestation of racism in this big national experiment we had on November 4th ?
And there are a couple of these that have strong predictive relationships , one of which is education , where you see the states with the fewest years of schooling per adult are in red , and you see this part of the country , the kind of Appalachians region , is less educated . Its just a fact .
And you see the relationship there with the racially - based voting patterns .
The other variable thats important is the type of neighborhood that you live in .
States that are more rural  -  -  even to some extent of the states like New Hampshire and Maine  -  -  they exhibit a little bit of this racially - based voting against Barack Obama .
So its the combination of these two things : its education and the type of neighbors that you have , which well talk about more in a moment .
And the thing about states like Arkansas and Tennessee is that theyre both very rural , and they are educationally impoverished .
So yes , racism is predictable .
These things , among maybe other variables , but these things seem to predict it .
Were going to drill down a little bit more now , into something called the General Social Survey .
This is conducted by the University of Chicago every other year .
And they ask a series of really interesting questions .
In 2000 they had particularly interesting questions about racial attitudes .
One simple question they asked is ,  Does anyone of the opposite race live in your neighborhood ? 
We can see in different types of communities that the results are quite different .
In cites , about 80 percent of people have someone whom they consider a neighbor of another race , but in rural communities , only about 30 percent .
Probably because if you live on a farm , you might not have a lot of neighbors , period .
But nevertheless , youre not having a lot of interaction with people who are unlike you .
So what were going to do now is take the white people in the survey and split them between those who have black neighbors  -  -  or , really , some neighbor of another race  -  -  and people who have only white neighbors .
And we see in some variables in terms of political attitudes , not a lot of difference .
This was eight years ago , some people were more Republican back then .
But you see Democrats versus Republican , not a big difference based on who your neighbors are .
And even some questions about race  -  -  for example affirmative action , which is kind of a political question , a policy question about race , if you will  -  -  not much difference here .
Affirmative action is not very popular frankly , with white voters , period .
But people with black neighbors and people with mono - racial neighborhoods feel no differently about it really .
But if you probe a bit deeper and get a bit more personal if you will ,  Do you favor a law banning interracial marriage ? 
There is a big difference .
People who dont have neighbors of a different race are about twice as likely to oppose interracial marriage as people who do .
Just based on who lives in your immediate neighborhood around you .
And likewise they asked , not in 2000 , but in the same survey in 1996 ,  Would you not vote for a qualified black president ? 
You see people without neighbors who are African - American who were much more likely to say ,  That would give me a problem . 
So its really not even about urban versus rural .
Its about who you live with .
Racism is predictable . And its predicted by interaction or lack thereof with people unlike you , people of other races .
So if you want to address it , the goal is to facilitate interaction with people of other races .
I have a couple of very obvious , I suppose , ideas for maybe how to do that .
Im a big fan of cities .
Especially if we have cites that are diverse and sustainable , and can support people of different ethnicities and different income groups .
I think cities facilitate more of the kind of networking , the kind of casual interaction than you might have on a daily basis .
But also not everyone wants to live in a city , certainly not a city like New York .
So we can think more about things like street grids .
This is the neighborhood where I grew up in East Lansing , Michigan .
Its a traditional Midwestern community , which means you have real grid .
You have real neighborhoods and real trees , and real streets you can walk on .
And you interact a lot with your neighbors  -  -  people you like , people you might not know .
And as a result its a very tolerant community , which is different , I think , than something like this , which is in Schaumburg , Illinois , where every little set of houses has their own cul - de - sac and drive - through Starbucks and stuff like that .
I think that actually this type of urban design , which became more prevalent in the 1970s and 1980s  -  -  I think there is a relationship between that and the country becoming more conservative under Ronald Reagan .
But also here is another idea we have  -  -  is an intercollegiate exchange program where you have students going from New York abroad .
But frankly there are enough differences within the country now where maybe you can take a bunch of kids from NYU , have them go study for a semester at the University of Arkansas , and vice versa . Do it at the high school level .
Literally there are people who might be in school in Arkansas or Tennessee and might never interact in a positive affirmative way with someone from another part of the country , or of another racial group .
I think part of the education variable we talked about before is the networking experience you get when you go to college where you do get a mix of people that you might not interact with otherwise .
But the point is , this is all good news , because when something is predictable , it is what I call designable .
You can start thinking about solutions to solving that problem , even if the problem is pernicious and as intractable as racism .
If we understand the root causes of the behavior and where it manifests itself and where it doesnt , we can start to design solutions to it .
So thats all I have to say . Thank you very much .
Denis Dutton : A Darwinian theory of beauty
TED collaborates with animator Andrew Park to illustrate Denis Duttons provocative theory on beauty  -  -  that art , music and other beautiful things , far from being simply  in the eye of the beholder ,  are a core part of human nature with deep evolutionary origins .
Delighted to be here and to talk to you about a subject dear to my heart , which is beauty .
I do the philosophy of art , aesthetics , actually , for a living .
I try to figure out intellectually , philosophically , psychologically , what the experience of beauty is , what sensibly can be said about it and how people go off the rails in trying to understand it .
Now this is an extremely complicated subject , in part because the things that we call beautiful are so different .
I mean just think of the sheer variety  -  -  a babys face , Berliozs  Harold in Italy ,  movies like  The Wizard of Oz  or the plays of Chekhov , a central California landscape , a Hokusai view of Mt . Fuji ,  Der Rosenkavalier ,  a stunning match - winning goal in a World Cup soccer match , Van Goghs  Starry Night ,  a Jane Austen novel , Fred Astaire dancing across the screen .
This brief list includes human beings , natural landforms , works of art and skilled human actions .
An account that explains the presence of beauty in everything on this list is not going to be easy .
I can , however , give you at least a taste of what I regard as the most powerful theory of beauty we yet have .
And we get it not from a philosopher of art , not from a postmodern art theorist or a bigwig art critic .
No , this theory comes from an expert on barnacles and worms and pigeon breeding , and you know who I mean : Charles Darwin .
Of course , a lot of people think they already know the proper answer to the question ,  What is beauty ? 
Its in the eye of the beholder .
Its whatever moves you personally .
Or , as some people , especially academics prefer , beauty is in the culturally conditioned eye of the beholder .
People agree that paintings or movies or music are beautiful because their cultures determine a uniformity of aesthetic taste .
Taste for both natural beauty and for the arts travel across cultures with great ease .
Beethoven is adored in Japan .
Peruvians love Japanese woodblock prints .
Inca sculptures are regarded as treasures in British museums , while Shakespeare is translated into every major language of the Earth .
Or just think about American jazz or American movies  -  -  they go everywhere .
There are many differences among the arts , but there are also universal , cross - cultural aesthetic pleasures and values .
How can we explain this universality ?
The best answer lies in trying to reconstruct a Darwinian evolutionary history of our artistic and aesthetic tastes .
We need to reverse - engineer our present artistic tastes and preferences and explain how they came to be engraved in our minds by the actions of both our prehistoric , largely pleistocene environments , where we became fully human , but also by the social situations in which we evolved .
This reverse engineering can also enlist help from the human record preserved in prehistory .
I mean fossils , cave paintings and so forth .
And it should take into account what we know of the aesthetic interests of isolated hunter - gatherer bands that survived into the 19th and the 20th centuries .
Now , I personally have no doubt whatsoever that the experience of beauty , with its emotional intensity and pleasure , belongs to our evolved human psychology .
The experience of beauty is one component in a whole series of Darwinian adaptations .
Beauty is an adaptive effect , which we extend and intensify in the creation and enjoyment of works of art and entertainment .
As many of you will know , evolution operates by two main primary mechanisms .
The first of these is natural selection  -  -  thats random mutation and selective retention  -  -  along with our basic anatomy and physiology  -  -  the evolution of the pancreas or the eye or the fingernails .
Natural selection also explains many basic revulsions , such as the horrid smell of rotting meat , or fears , such as the fear of snakes or standing close to the edge of a cliff .
Natural selection also explains pleasures  -  -  sexual pleasure , our liking for sweet , fat and proteins , which in turn explains a lot of popular foods , from ripe fruits through chocolate malts and barbecued ribs .
The other great principle of evolution is sexual selection , and it operates very differently .
The peacocks magnificent tail is the most famous example of this .
It did not evolve for natural survival .
In fact , it goes against natural survival .
No , the peacocks tail results from the mating choices made by peahens .
Its quite a familiar story .
Its women who actually push history forward .
Darwin himself , by the way , had no doubts that the peacocks tail was beautiful in the eyes of the peahen .
He actually used that word .
Now , keeping these ideas firmly in mind , we can say that the experience of beauty is one of the ways that evolution has of arousing and sustaining interest or fascination , even obsession , in order to encourage us toward making the most adaptive decisions for survival and reproduction .
Beauty is natures way of acting at a distance , so to speak .
I mean , you cant expect to eat an adaptively beneficial landscape .
It would hardly do to eat your baby or your lover .
So evolutions trick is to make them beautiful , to have them exert a kind of magnetism to give you the pleasure of simply looking at them .
Consider briefly an important source of aesthetic pleasure , the magnetic pull of beautiful landscapes .
People in very different cultures all over the world tend to like a particular kind of landscape , a landscape that just happens to be similar to the pleistocene savannas where we evolved .
This landscape shows up today on calendars , on postcards , in the design of golf courses and public parks and in gold - framed pictures that hang in living rooms from New York to New Zealand .
Its a kind of Hudson River school landscape featuring open spaces of low grasses interspersed with copses of trees .
The trees , by the way , are often preferred if they fork near the ground , that is to say , if theyre trees you could scramble up if you were in a tight fix .
The landscape shows the presence of water directly in view , or evidence of water in a bluish distance , indications of animal or bird life as well as diverse greenery and finally  -  -  get this  -  -  a path or a road , perhaps a riverbank or a shoreline , that extends into the distance , almost inviting you to follow it .
This landscape type is regarded as beautiful , even by people in countries that dont have it .
The ideal savanna landscape is one of the clearest examples where human beings everywhere find beauty in similar visual experience .
But , someone might argue , thats natural beauty .
How about artistic beauty ?
Isnt that exhaustively cultural ?
No , I dont think it is .
And once again , Id like to look back to prehistory to say something about it .
It is widely assumed that the earliest human artworks are the stupendously skillful cave paintings that we all know from Lascaux and Chauvet .
Chauvet caves are about 32,000 years old , along with a few small , realistic sculptures of women and animals from the same period .
But artistic and decorative skills are actually much older than that .
Beautiful shell necklaces that look like something youd see at an arts and crafts fair , as well as ochre body paint , have been found from around 100,000 years ago .
But the most intriguing prehistoric artifacts are older even than this .
I have in mind the so - called Acheulian hand axes .
The oldest stone tools are choppers from the Olduvai Gorge in East Africa .
They go back about two - and - a - half - million years .
These crude tools were around for thousands of centuries , until around 1.4 million years ago when Homo erectus started shaping single , thin stone blades , sometimes rounded ovals , but often in what are to our eyes an arresting , symmetrical pointed leaf or teardrop form .
These Acheulian hand axes  -  -  theyre named after St . Acheul in France , where finds were made in 19th century  -  -  have been unearthed in their thousands , scattered across Asia , Europe and Africa , almost everywhere Homo erectus and Homo ergaster roamed .
Now , the sheer numbers of these hand axes shows that they cant have been made for butchering animals .
And the plot really thickens when you realize that , unlike other pleistocene tools , the hand axes often exhibit no evidence of wear on their delicate blade edges .
And some , in any event , are too big to use for butchery .
Their symmetry , their attractive materials and , above all , their meticulous workmanship are simply quite beautiful to our eyes , even today .
So what were these ancient  -  -  I mean , theyre ancient , theyre foreign , but theyre at the same time somehow familiar .
What were these artifacts for ?
The best available answer is that they were literally the earliest known works of art , practical tools transformed into captivating aesthetic objects , contemplated both for their elegant shape and their virtuoso craftsmanship .
Hand axes mark an evolutionary advance in human history  -  -  tools fashioned to function as what Darwinians call  fitness signals   -  -  that is to say , displays that are performances like the peacocks tail , except that , unlike hair and feathers , the hand axes are consciously cleverly crafted .
Competently made hand axes indicated desirable personal qualities  -  -  intelligence , fine motor control , planning ability , conscientiousness and sometimes access to rare materials .
Over tens of thousands of generations , such skills increased the status of those who displayed them and gained a reproductive advantage over the less capable .
You know , its an old line , but it has been shown to work  -  -   Why dont you come up to my cave , so I can show you my hand axes ? 
Except , of course , whats interesting about this is that we cant be sure how that idea was conveyed , because the Homo erectus that made these objects did not have language .
Its hard to grasp , but its an incredible fact .
This object was made by a hominid ancestor , Homo erectus or Homo ergaster , between 50,000 and 100,000 years before language .
Stretching over a million years , the hand axe tradition is the longest artistic tradition in human and proto - human history .
By the end of the hand axe epic , Homo sapiens  -  -  as they were then called , finally  -  -  were doubtless finding new ways to amuse and amaze each other by , who knows , telling jokes , storytelling , dancing , or hairstyling .
Yes , hairstyling  -  -  I insist on that .
For us moderns , virtuoso technique is used to create imaginary worlds in fiction and in movies , to express intense emotions with music , painting and dance .
But still , one fundamental trait of the ancestral personality persists in our aesthetic cravings : the beauty we find in skilled performances .
From Lascaux to the Louvre to Carnegie Hall , human beings have a permanent innate taste for virtuoso displays in the arts .
We find beauty in something done well .
So the next time you pass a jewelry shop window displaying a beautifully cut teardrop - shaped stone , dont be so sure its just your culture telling you that that sparkling jewel is beautiful .
Your distant ancestors loved that shape and found beauty in the skill needed to make it , even before they could put their love into words .
Is beauty in the eye of the beholder ?
No , its deep in our minds .
Its a gift handed down from the intelligent skills and rich emotional lives of our most ancient ancestors .
Our powerful reaction to images , to the expression of emotion in art , to the beauty of music , to the night sky , will be with us and our descendants for as long as the human race exists .
Thank you .
Lawrence Lessig : We the People , and the Republic we must reclaim
There is a corruption at the heart of American politics , caused by the dependence of Congressional candidates on funding from the tiniest percentage of citizens . Thats the argument at the core of this blistering talk by legal scholar Lawrence Lessig . With rapid - fire visuals , he shows how the funding process weakens the Republic in the most fundamental way , and issues a rallying bipartisan cry that will resonate with many in the U.S . and beyond .
Once upon a time , there was a place called Lesterland .
Now Lesterland looks a lot like the United States .
Like the United States , it has about 311 million people , and of that 311 million people , it turns out 144,000 are called Lester .
If Matts in the audience , I just borrowed that , Ill return it in a second , this character from your series .
So 144,000 are called Lester , which means about .05 percent is named Lester .
Now , Lesters in Lesterland have this extraordinary power .
There are two elections every election cycle in Lesterland .
One is called the general election .
The other is called the Lester election .
And in the general election , its the citizens who get to vote , but in the Lester election , its the Lesters who get to vote .
And heres the trick .
In order to run in the general election , you must do extremely well in the Lester election .
You dont necessarily have to win , but you must do extremely well .
Now , what can we say about democracy in Lesterland ?
What we can say , number one , as the Supreme Court said in Citizens United , that people have the ultimate influence over elected officials , because , after all , there is a general election , but only after the Lesters have had their way with the candidates who wish to run in the general election .
And number two , obviously , this dependence upon the Lesters is going to produce a subtle , understated , we could say camouflaged , bending to keep the Lesters happy .
Okay , so we have a democracy , no doubt , but its dependent upon the Lesters and dependent upon the people .
It has competing dependencies , we could say conflicting dependencies , depending upon who the Lesters are .
Okay . Thats Lesterland .
Now there are three things I want you to see now that Ive described Lesterland .
Number one , the United States is Lesterland .
The United States is Lesterland .
The United States also looks like this , also has two elections , one we called the general election , the second we should call the money election .
In the general election , its the citizens who get to vote , if youre over 18 , in some states if you have an ID .
In the money election , its the funders who get to vote , the funders who get to vote , and just like in Lesterland , the trick is , to run in the general election , you must do extremely well in the money election .
You dont necessarily have to win . There is Jerry Brown .
But you must do extremely well .
And heres the key : There are just as few relevant funders in USA - land as there are Lesters in Lesterland .
Now you say , really ?
Really .05 percent ?
Well , here are the numbers from 2010 : .26 percent of America gave 200 dollars or more to any federal candidate , .05 percent gave the maximum amount to any federal candidate , .01 percent  -  -  the one percent of the one percent  -  -  gave 10,000 dollars or more to federal candidates , and in this election cycle , my favorite statistic is .000042 percent — for those of you doing the numbers , you know thats 132 Americans — gave 60 percent of the Super PAC money spent in the cycle we have just seen ending .
So Im just a lawyer , I look at this range of numbers , and I say its fair for me to say its .05 percent who are our relevant funders in America .
In this sense , the funders are our Lesters .
Now , what can we say about this democracy in USA - land ?
Well , as the Supreme Court said in Citizens United , we could say , of course the people have the ultimate influence over the elected officials . We have a general election , but only after the funders have had their way with the candidates who wish to run in that general election .
And number two , obviously , this dependence upon the funders produces a subtle , understated , camouflaged bending to keep the funders happy .
Candidates for Congress and members of Congress spend between 30 and 70 percent of their time raising money to get back to Congress or to get their party back into power , and the question we need to ask is , what does it do to them , these humans , as they spend their time behind the telephone , calling people theyve never met , but calling the tiniest slice of the one percent ?
As anyone would , as they do this , they develop a sixth sense , a constant awareness about how what they do might affect their ability to raise money .
They become , in the words of  The X - Files ,  shape - shifters , as they constantly adjust their views in light of what they know will help them to raise money , not on issues one to 10 , but on issues 11 to 1,000 .
Leslie Byrne , a Democrat from Virginia , describes that when she went to Congress , she was told by a colleague ,  Always lean to the green . 
Then to clarify , she went on ,  He was not an environmentalist . 
So here too we have a democracy , a democracy dependent upon the funders and dependent upon the people , competing dependencies , possibly conflicting dependencies depending upon who the funders are .
Okay , the United States is Lesterland , point number one .
Heres point number two .
The United States is worse than Lesterland , worse than Lesterland because you can imagine in Lesterland if we Lesters got a letter from the government that said ,  Hey , you get to pick who gets to run in the general election ,  we would think maybe of a kind of aristocracy of Lesters .
You know , there are Lesters from every part of social society .
There are rich Lesters , poor Lesters , black Lesters , white Lesters , not many women Lesters , but put that to the side for one second .
We have Lesters from everywhere . We could think ,  What could we do to make Lesterland better ? 
Its at least possible the Lesters would act for the good of Lesterland .
But in our land , in this land , in USA - land , there are certainly some sweet Lesters out there , many of them in this room here today , but the vast majority of Lesters act for the Lesters , because the shifting coalitions that are comprising the .05 percent are not comprising it for the public interest .
Its for their private interest . In this sense , the USA is worse than Lesterland .
And finally , point number three : Whatever one wants to say about Lesterland , against the background of its history , its traditions , in our land , in USA - land , Lesterland is a corruption , a corruption .
Now , by corruption I dont mean brown paper bag cash secreted among members of Congress .
I dont mean Rod Blagojevich sense of corruption .
I dont mean any criminal act .
The corruption Im talking about is perfectly legal .
Its a corruption relative to the framers baseline for this republic .
The framers gave us what they called a republic , but by a republic they meant a representative democracy , and by a representative democracy , they meant a government , as Madison put it in Federalist 52 , that would have a branch that would be dependent upon the people alone .
So heres the model of government .
They have the people and the government with this exclusive dependency , but the problem here is that Congress has evolved a different dependence , no longer a dependence upon the people alone , increasingly a dependence upon the funders .
Now this is a dependence too , but its different and conflicting from a dependence upon the people alone so long as the funders are not the people .
This is a corruption .
Now , theres good news and bad news about this corruption .
One bit of good news is that its bipartisan , equal - opportunity corruption .
It blocks the left on a whole range of issues that we on the left really care about .
It blocks the right too , as it makes principled arguments of the right increasingly impossible .
So the right wants smaller government .
When Al Gore was Vice President , his team had an idea for deregulating a significant portion of the telecommunications industry .
The chief policy man took this idea to Capitol Hill , and as he reported back to me , the response was ,  Hell no !
If we deregulate these guys , how are we going to raise money from them ? 
This is a system thats designed to save the status quo , including the status quo of big and invasive government .
It works against the left and the right , and that , you might say , is good news .
But heres the bad news .
Its a pathological , democracy - destroying corruption , because in any system where the members are dependent upon the tiniest fraction of us for their election , that means the tiniest number of us , the tiniest , tiniest number of us , can block reform .
I know that should have been , like , a rock or something .
I can only find cheese . Im sorry . So there it is .
Block reform .
Because there is an economy here , an economy of influence , an economy with lobbyists at the center which feeds on polarization .
It feeds on dysfunction .
The worse that it is for us , the better that it is for this fundraising .
Henry David Thoreau :  There are a thousand hacking at the branches of evil to one who is striking at the root . 
This is the root .
Okay , now , every single one of you knows this .
You couldnt be here if you didnt know this , yet you ignore it .
You ignore it . This is an impossible problem .
You focus on the possible problems , like eradicating polio from the world , or taking an image of every single street across the globe , or building the first real universal translator , or building a fusion factory in your garage .
These are the manageable problems , so you ignore — — so you ignore this corruption .
But we can not ignore this corruption anymore .
We need a government that works .
And not works for the left or the right , but works for the left and the right , the citizens of the left and right , because there is no sensible reform possible until we end this corruption .
So I want you to take hold , to grab the issue you care the most about .
Climate change is mine , but it might be financial reform or a simpler tax system or inequality .
Grab that issue , sit it down in front of you , look straight in its eyes , and tell it there is no Christmas this year .
There will never be a Christmas .
We will never get your issue solved until we fix this issue first .
So its not that mine is the most important issue . Its not .
Yours is the most important issue , but mine is the first issue , the issue we have to solve before we get to fix the issues you care about .
No sensible reform , and we can not afford a world , a future , with no sensible reform .
Okay . So how do we do it ?
Turns out , the analytics here are easy , simple .
If the problem is members spending an extraordinary amount of time fundraising from the tiniest slice of America , the solution is to have them spend less time fundraising but fundraise from a wider slice of Americans , to spread it out , to spread the funder influence so that we restore the idea of dependence upon the people alone .
And to do this does not require a constitutional amendment , changing the First Amendment .
To do this would require a single statute , a statute establishing what we think of as small dollar funded elections , a statute of citizen - funded campaigns , and theres any number of these proposals out there : Fair Elections Now Act , the American Anti - Corruption Act , an idea in my book that I call the Grant and Franklin Project to give vouchers to people to fund elections , an idea of John Sarbanes called the Grassroots Democracy Act .
Each of these would fix this corruption by spreading out the influence of funders to all of us .
The analytics are easy here .
Its the politics thats hard , indeed impossibly hard , because this reform would shrink K Street , and Capitol Hill , as Congressman Jim Cooper , a Democrat from Tennessee , put it , has become a farm league for K Street , a farm league for K Street .
Members and staffers and bureaucrats have an increasingly common business model in their head , a business model focused on their life after government , their life as lobbyists .
Fifty percent of the Senate between 1998 and 2004 left to become lobbyists , 42 percent of the House .
Those numbers have only gone up , and as United Republic calculated last April , the average increase in salary for those who they tracked was 1,452 percent .
So its fair to ask , how is it possible for them to change this ?
Now I get this skepticism .
I get this cynicism . I get this sense of impossibility .
But I dont buy it .
This is a solvable issue .
If you think about the issues our parents tried to solve in the 20th century , issues like racism , or sexism , or the issue that weve been fighting in this century , homophobia , those are hard issues .
You dont wake up one day no longer a racist .
It takes generations to tear that intuition , that DNA , out of the soul of a people .
But this is a problem of just incentives , just incentives .
Change the incentives , and the behavior changes , and the states that have adopted small dollar funded systems have seen overnight a change in the practice .
When Connecticut adopted this system , in the very first year , 78 percent of elected representatives gave up large contributions and took small contributions only .
Its solvable , not by being a Democrat , not by being a Republican .
Its solvable by being citizens , by being citizens , by being TEDizens .
Because if you want to kickstart reform , look , I could kickstart reform at half the price of fixing energy policy , I could give you back a republic .
Okay . But even if youre not yet with me , even if you believe this is impossible , what the five years since I spoke at TED has taught me as Ive spoken about this issue again and again is , even if you think its impossible , that is irrelevant .
Irrelevant .
I spoke at Dartmouth once , and a woman stood up after I spoke , I write in my book , and she said to me ,  Professor , youve convinced me this is hopeless . Hopeless .
Theres nothing we can do . 
When she said that , I scrambled .
I tried to think ,  How do I respond to that hopelessness ?
What is that sense of hopelessness ? 
And what hit me was an image of my six - year - old son .
And I imagined a doctor coming to me and saying ,  Your son has terminal brain cancer , and theres nothing you can do .
Nothing you can do . 
So would I do nothing ?
Would I just sit there ? Accept it ? Okay , nothing I can do ?
Im going off to build Google Glass .
Of course not . I would do everything I could , and I would do everything I could because this is what love means , that the odds are irrelevant and that you do whatever the hell you can , the odds be damned .
And then I saw the obvious link , because even we liberals love this country .
And so when the pundits and the politicians say that change is impossible , what this love of country says back is ,  Thats just irrelevant . 
We lose something dear , something everyone in this room loves and cherishes , if we lose this republic , and so we act with everything we can to prove these pundits wrong .
So heres my question : Do you have that love ?
Do you have that love ?
Because if you do , then what the hell are you , what are the hell are we doing ?
When Ben Franklin was carried from the constitutional convention in September of 1787 , he was stopped in the street by a woman who said ,  Mr. Franklin , what have you wrought ? 
Franklin said ,  A republic , madam , if you can keep it . 
A republic . A representative democracy .
A government dependent upon the people alone .
We have lost that republic .
All of us have to act to get it back .
Thank you very much .
Thank you . Thank you . Thank you .
Gary Greenberg : The beautiful nano details of our world
When photographed under a 3D microscope , grains of sand appear like colorful pieces of candy and the stamens in a flower become like fantastical spires at an amusement park . Gary Greenberg reveals the thrilling details of the micro world .
So I want to talk a little bit about seeing the world from a totally unique point of view , and this world Im going to talk about is the micro world .
Ive found , after doing this for many , many years , that theres a magical world behind reality .
And that can be seen directly through a microscope , and Im going to show you some of this today .
So lets start off looking at something rather not - so - small , something that we can see with our naked eye , and thats a bee . So when you look at this bee , its about this size here , its about a centimeter .
But to really see the details of the bee , and really appreciate what it is , you have to look a little bit closer .
So thats just the eye of the bee with a microscope , and now all of a sudden you can see that the bee has thousands of individual eyes called ommatidia , and they actually have sensory hairs in their eyes so they know when theyre right up close to something , because they cant see in stereo .
As we go smaller , here is a human hair .
A human hair is about the smallest thing that the eye can see .
Its about a tenth of a millimeter .
And as we go smaller again , about ten times smaller than that , is a cell .
So you could fit 10 human cells across the diameter of a human hair .
So when we would look at cells , this is how I really got involved in biology and science is by looking at living cells in the microscope .
When I first saw living cells in a microscope , I was absolutely enthralled and amazed at what they looked like .
So if you look at the cell like that from the immune system , theyre actually moving all over the place .
This cell is looking for foreign objects , bacteria , things that it can find .
And its looking around , and when it finds something , and recognizes it being foreign , it will actually engulf it and eat it .
So if you look right there , it finds that little bacterium , and it engulfs it and eats it .
If you take some heart cells from an animal , and put it in a dish , theyll just sit there and beat .
Thats their job . Every cell has a mission in life , and these cells , the mission is to move blood around our body .
These next cells are nerve cells , and right now , as we see and understand what were looking at , our brains and our nerve cells are actually doing this right now . Theyre not just static . Theyre moving around making new connections , and thats what happens when we learn .
As you go farther down this scale here , thats a micron , or a micrometer , and we go all the way down to here to a nanometer and an angstrom . Now , an angstrom is the size of the diameter of a hydrogen atom .
Thats how small that is .
And microscopes that we have today can actually see individual atoms . So these are some pictures of individual atoms . Each bump here is an individual atom .
This is a ring of cobalt atoms .
So this whole world , the nano world , this area in here is called the nano world , and the nano world , the whole micro world that we see , theres a nano world that is wrapped up within that , and the whole  -  -  and that is the world of molecules and atoms .
But I want to talk about this larger world , the world of the micro world .
So if you were a little tiny bug living in a flower , what would that flower look like , if the flower was this big ?
It wouldnt look or feel like anything that we see when we look at a flower . So if you look at this flower here , and youre a little bug , if youre on that surface of that flower , thats what the terrain would look like .
The petal of that flower looks like that , so the ant is kind of crawling over these objects , and if you look a little bit closer at this stigma and the stamen here , this is the style of that flower , and you notice that its got these little  -  -  these are like little jelly - like things that are what are called spurs . These are nectar spurs .
So this little ant thats crawling here , its like its in a little Willy Wonka land .
Its like a little Disneyland for them . Its not like what we see .
These are little bits of individual grain of pollen there and there , and here is a  -  -  what you see as one little yellow dot of pollen , when you look in a microscope , its actually made of thousands of little grains of pollen .
So this , for example , when you see bees flying around these little plants , and theyre collecting pollen , those pollen grains that theyre collecting , they pack into their legs and they take it back to the hive , and thats what makes the beehive , the wax in the beehive . And theyre also collecting nectar , and thats what makes the honey that we eat .
Heres a close - up picture , or this is actually a regular picture of a water hyacinth , and if you had really , really good vision , with your naked eye , youd see it about that well .
Theres the stamen and the pistil . But look what the stamen and the pistil look like in a microscope . Thats the stamen .
So thats thousands of little grains of pollen there , and theres the pistil there , and these are the little things called trichomes . And thats what makes the flower give a fragrance , and plants actually communicate with one another through their fragrances .
I want to talk about something really ordinary , just ordinary sand .
I became interested in sand about 10 years ago , when I first saw sand from Maui , and in fact , this is a little bit of sand from Maui .
So sand is about a tenth of a millimeter in size .
Each sand grain is about a tenth of a millimeter in size .
But when you look closer at this , look at whats there .
Its really quite amazing . You have microshells there .
You have things like coral .
You have fragments of other shells . You have olivine .
You have bits of a volcano . Theres a little bit of a volcano there . You have tube worms .
An amazing array of incredible things exist in sand .
And the reason that is , is because in a place like this island , a lot of the sand is made of biological material because the reefs provide a place where all these microscopic animals or macroscopic animals grow , and when they die , their shells and their teeth and their bones break up and they make grains of sand , things like coral and so forth .
So heres , for example , a picture of sand from Maui .
This is from Lahaina , and when were walking along a beach , were actually walking along millions of years of biological and geological history .
We dont realize it , but its actually a record of that entire ecology .
So here we see , for example , a sponge spicule , two bits of coral here , thats a sea urchin spine . Really some amazing stuff .
So when I first looked at this , I was  -  -  I thought , gee , this is like a little treasure trove here .
I couldnt believe it , and Id go around dissecting the little bits out and making photographs of them .
Heres what most of the sand in our world looks like .
These are quartz crystals and feldspar , so most sand in the world on the mainland is made of quartz crystal and feldspar . Its the erosion of granite rock .
So mountains are built up , and they erode away by water and rain and ice and so forth , and they become grains of sand .
Theres some sand thats really much more colorful .
These are sand from near the Great Lakes , and you can see that its filled with minerals like pink garnet and green epidote , all kinds of amazing stuff , and if you look at different sands from different places , every single beach , every single place you look at sand , its different . Heres from Big Sur , like theyre little jewels .
There are places in Africa where they do the mining of jewels , and you go to the sand where the rivers have the sand go down to the ocean , and its like literally looking at tiny jewels through the microscope .
So every grain of sand is unique . Every beach is different .
Every single grain is different . There are no two grains of sand alike in the world .
Every grain of sand is coming somewhere and going somewhere .
Theyre like a snapshot in time .
Now sand is not only on Earth , but sand is ubiquitous throughout the universe . In fact , outer space is filled with sand , and that sand comes together to make our planets and the Moon .
And you can see those in micrometeorites .
This is some micrometeorites that the Army gave me , and they get these out of the drinking wells in the South Pole .
And theyre quite amazing - looking , and these are the tiny constituents that make up the world that we live in  -  -  the planets and the Moon .
So NASA wanted me to take some pictures of Moon sand , so they sent me sand from all the different landings of the Apollo missions that happened 40 years ago .
And I started taking pictures with my three - dimensional microscopes .
This was the first picture I took . It was kind of amazing .
I thought it looked kind of a little bit like the Moon , which is sort of interesting .
Now , the way my microscopes work is , normally in a microscope you can see very little at one time , so what you have to do is you have to refocus the microscope , keep taking pictures , and then I have a computer program that puts all those pictures together into one picture so you can see actually what it looks like , and I do that in 3D . So there , you can see , is a left - eye view . Theres a right - eye view .
So sort of left - eye view , right - eye view .
Now somethings interesting here . This looks very different than any sand on Earth that Ive ever seen , and Ive seen a lot of sand on Earth , believe me .
Look at this hole in the middle . That hole was caused by a micrometeorite hitting the Moon .
Now , the Moon has no atmosphere , so micrometeorites come in continuously , and the whole surface of the Moon is covered with powder now , because for four billion years its been bombarded by micrometeorites , and when micrometeorites come in at about 20 to 60,000 miles an hour , they vaporize on contact .
And you can see here that that is  -  -  thats sort of vaporized , and that material is holding this little clump of little sand grains together .
This is a very small grain of sand , this whole thing .
And thats called a ring agglutinate .
And many of the grains of sand on the Moon look like that , and youd never find that on Earth .
Most of the sand on the Moon , especially  -  -  and you know when you look at the Moon , theres the dark areas and the light areas . The dark areas are lava flows . Theyre basaltic lava flows , and thats what this sand looks like , very similar to the sand that you would see in Haleakala .
Other sands , when these micrometeorites come in , they vaporize and they make these fountains , these microscopic fountains that go up into the  -  -  I was going to say  up into the air ,  but there is no air  -  -  goes sort of up , and these microscopic glass beads are formed instantly , and they harden , and by the time they fall down back to the surface of the Moon , they have these beautiful colored glass spherules .
And these are actually microscopic ; you need a microscope to see these .
Now heres a grain of sand that is from the Moon , and you can see that the entire crystal structure is still there .
This grain of sand is probably about three and a half or four billion years old , and its never eroded away like the way we have sand on Earth erodes away because of water and tumbling , air , and so forth . All you can see is a little bit of erosion down here by the Sun , has these solar storms , and thats erosion by solar radiation .
So what Ive been trying to tell you today is things even as ordinary as a grain of sand can be truly extraordinary if you look closely and if you look from a different and a new point of view .
I think that this was best put by William Blake when he said ,  To see a world in a grain of sand and a heaven in a wild flower , hold infinity in the palm of your hand , and eternity in an hour . 
Thank you .
Edith Widder : The weird , wonderful world of bioluminescence
In the deep , dark ocean , many sea creatures make their own light for hunting , mating and self - defense . Bioluminescence expert Edith Widder was one of the first to film this glimmering world . At TED2011 , she brings some of her glowing friends onstage , and shows more astonishing footage of glowing undersea life .
So I want to take you on a trip to an alien world .
And its not a trip that requires light - years of travel , but its to a place where its defined by light .
So its a little - appreciated fact that most of the animals in our ocean make light .
Ive spent most of my career studying this phenomenon called bioluminescence .
I study it because I think understanding it is critical to understanding life in the ocean where most bioluminescence occurs .
I also use it as a tool for visualizing and tracking pollution .
But mostly Im entranced by it .
Since my my first dive in a deep - diving submersible , when I went down and turned out the lights and saw the fireworks displays , Ive been a bioluminescence junky .
But I would come back from those dives and try to share the experience with words , and they were totally inadequate to the task .
I needed some way to share the experience directly .
And the first time I figured out that way was in this little single - person submersible called Deep Rover .
This next video clip , youre going to see how we stimulated the bioluminescence .
And the first thing youre going to see is a transect screen that is about a meter across .
In front of the sub , a mess screen will come into contact with the soft - bodied creatures of the deep sea .
With the subs lights switched off , it is possible to see their bioluminescence  -  -  the light produced when they collide with the mesh .
This is the first time it has ever been recorded .
Edith Widder : So I recorded that with an intensified video camera that has about the sensitivity of the fully dark - adapted human eye .
Which means that really is what you would see if you took a dive in a submersible .
But just to try to prove that fact to you , Ive brought along some bioluminescent plankton in what is undoubtedly a foolhardy attempt at a live demonstration .
So , if we could have the lights down and have it as dark in here as possible , I have a flask that has bioluminescent plankton in it .
And youll note theres no light coming from them right now , either because theyre dead  -  -  or because I need to stir them up in some way for you to see what bioluminescence really looks like .
Oops . Sorry .
I spend most of my time working in the dark ; Im used to that .
Okay .
So that light was made by a bioluminescent dinoflagellate , a single - celled alga .
So why would a single - celled alga need to be able to produce light ?
Well , it uses it to defend itself from its predators .
The flash is like a scream for help .
Its whats known as a bioluminescent burglar alarm , and just like the alarm on your car or your house , its meant to cast unwanted attention onto the intruder , thereby either leading to his capture or scaring him away .
Theres a lot of animals that use this trick , for example this black dragonfish .
Its got a light organ under its eye .
Its got a chin barbel .
Its got a lot of other light organs you cant see , but youll see in here in a minute .
So we had to chase this in the submersible for quite sometime , because the top speed of this fish is one knot , which was the top speed of the submersible .
But it was worth it , because we caught it in a special capture device , brought it up into the lab on the ship , and then everything on this fish lights up .
Its unbelievable .
The light organs under the eyes are flashing .
That chin barbel is flashing .
Its got light organs on its belly that are flashing , fin lights .
Its a scream for help ; its meant to attract attention .
Its phenomenal .
And you normally dont get to see this because weve exhausted the luminescence when we bring them up in nets .
Theres other ways you can defend yourself with light .
For example , this shrimp releases its bioluminescent chemicals into the water just the way a squid or an octopus would release an ink cloud .
This blinds or distracts the predator .
This little squid is called the fire shooter because of its ability to do this .
Now it may look like a tasty morsel , or a pigs head with wings  -  -  but if its attacked , it puts out a barrage of light  -  -  in fact , a barrage of photon torpedoes .
I just barely got the lights out in time for you to be able to see those gobs of light hitting the transect screen and then just glowing .
Its phenomenal .
So theres a lot of animals in the open ocean  -  -  most of them that make light .
And we have a pretty good idea , for most of them , why .
They use it for finding food , for attracting mates , for defending against predators .
But when you get down to the bottom of the ocean , thats where things get really strange .
And some of these animals are probably inspiration for the things you saw in  Avatar ,  but you dont have to travel to Pandora to see them .
Theyre things like this .
This is a golden coral , a bush .
It grows very slowly .
In fact , its thought that some of these are as much as 3,000 years old , which is one reason that bottom trawling should not be allowed .
The other reason is this amazing bush glows .
So if you brush up against it , any place you brushed against it , you get this twinkling blue - green light thats just breathtaking .
And you see things like this .
This looks like something out of a Dr . Seuss book  -  -  just all manner of creatures all over this thing .
And these are flytrap anemones .
Now if you poke it , it pulls in its tentacles .
But if you keep poking it , it starts to produce light .
And it actually ends up looking like a galaxy .
It produces these strings of light , presumably as some form of defense .
There are starfish that can make light .
And there are brittle stars that produce bands of light that dance along their arms .
This looks like a plant , but its actually an animal .
And it anchors itself in the sand by blowing up a balloon on the end of its stock .
So it can actually hold itself in very strong currents , as you see here .
But if we collect it very gently , and we bring it up into the lab and just squeeze it at the base of the stock , it produces this light that propagates from stem to the plume , changing color as it goes , from green to blue .
Colorization and sound effects added for you viewing pleasure .
But we have no idea why it does that .
Heres another one . This is also a sea pen .
Its got a brittle star hitching a ride .
Its a green saber of light .
And like the one you just saw , it can produce these as bands of light .
So if I squeeze the base , the bands go from base to tip .
If I squeeze the tip , they go from tip to base .
So what do you think happens if you squeeze it in the middle ?
Id be very interested in your theories about what thats about .
So theres a language of light in the deep ocean , and were just beginning to understand it , and one way were going about that is were imitating a lot of these displays .
This is an optical lure that Ive used .
We call it the electronic jellyfish .
Its just 16 blue LEDs that we can program to do different types of displays .
And we view it with a camera system I developed called Eye - in - the - Sea that uses far red light thats invisible to most animals , so its unobtrusive .
So I just want to show you some of the responses weve elicited from animals in the deep sea .
So the cameras black and white .
Its not high - resolution .
And what youre seeing here is a bait box with a bunch of  -  -  like the cockroaches of the ocean  -  -  there are isopods all over it .
And right in the front is the electronic jellyfish .
And when it starts flashing , its just going to be one of the LEDs thats flashing very fast .
But as soon as it starts to flash  -  -  and its going to look big , because it blooms on the camera  -  -  I want you to look right here .
Theres something small there that responds .
Were talking to something .
It looks like a little of string pearls basically  -  -  in fact , three strings of pearls .
And this was very consistent .
This was in the Bahamas at about 2,000 feet .
We basically have a chat room going on here , because once it gets started , everybodys talking .
And I think this is actually a shrimp thats releasing its bioluminescent chemicals into the water .
But the cool thing is , were talking to it .
We dont know what were saying .
Personally , I think its something sexy .
And then finally , I want to show you some responses that we recorded with the worlds first deep - sea webcam , which we had installed in Monterey Canyon last year .
Weve only just begun to analyze all of this data .
This is going to be a glowing source first , which is like bioluminescent bacteria .
And it is an optical cue that theres carrion on the bottom of the ocean .
So this scavenger comes in , which is a giant sixgill shark .
And I cant claim for sure that the optical source brought it in , because theres bait right there .
But if it had been following the odor plume , it would have come in from the other direction .
And it does actually seem to be trying to eat the electronic jellyfish .
Thats a 12 - foot - long giant sixgill shark .
Okay , so this next one is from the webcam , and its going to be this pinwheel display .
And this is a burglar alarm .
And that was a Humboldt squid , a juvenile Humboldt squid , about three feet long .
This is at 3,000 feet in Monterey Canyon .
But if its a burglar alarm , you wouldnt expect it to attack the jellyfish directly .
Its supposed to be attacking whats attacking the jellyfish .
But we did see a bunch of responses like this .
This guy is a little more contemplative .
 Hey , wait a minute .
Theres supposed to be something else there . 
Hes thinking about it .
But hes persistent .
He keeps coming back .
And then he goes away for a few seconds to think about it some more , and thinks ,  Maybe if I come in from a different angle . 
Nope .
So we are starting to get a handle on this , but only just the beginnings .
We need more eyes on the process .
So if any of you ever get a chance to take a dive in a submersible , by all means , climb in and take the plunge .
This is something that should be on everybodys bucket list , because we live on an ocean planet .
More than 90 percent , 99 percent , of the living space on our planet is ocean .
Its a magical place filled with breathtaking light shows and bizarre and wondrous creatures , alien life forms that you dont have to travel to another planet to see .
But if you do take the plunge , please remember to turn out the lights .
But I warn you , its addictive .
Thank you .
Vusi Mahlasela :  Thula Mama 
South African singer - songwriter Vusi Mahlasela dedicates his song ,  Thula Mama ,  to all women  -  -  and especially his grandmother .
Id like to dedicate this one to all the women in South Africa  -  -  those women who refused to dwindle in the midst of apartheid .
And , of course , Im dedicating it also to my grandmother , whom I think really played quite a lot of important roles , especially for me when I was an activist , and being harassed by the police .
You will recall that in 1976 , June 16 , the students of South Africa boycotted the language of Afrikaans as the medium of the oppressor , as they were sort of like really told that they must do everything in Afrikaans  -  -  biology , mathematics  -  -  and what about our languages ?
And the students wanted to speak to the government , and police answered with bullets .
So every year , June 16 , we will commemorate all those comrades or students who died .
And I was very young then . I think I was 11 years , and I started asking questions , and thats when my political education started .
And I joined , later on , the youth organization under the African National Congress .
So as part of organizing this and whatever , this commemoration , the police will round us up as they call us leaders .
And I used to run away from home , when I know that maybe the police might be coming around the ninth or 10th of June or so .
And my grandmother one time said ,  No , look , youre not going to run away .
This is your place , you stay here . 
And indeed , the police came  -  -  because theyll just arrest us and put us in jail and release us whenever they feel like , after the 20th or so .
So it was on the 10th of June , and they came , and they surrounded the house , and my grandmother switched off all the lights in the house , and opened the kitchen door .
And she said to them ,  Vusis here , and youre not going to take him tonight .
Im tired of you having to come here , harassing us , while your children are sleeping peacefully in your homes .
He is here , and youre not going to take him .
Ive got a bowl full of boiling water  -  -  the first one who comes in here , gets it . 
And they left .
Thula Mama , Thula Mama , Thula Mama , Thula Mama . Through the mist of the tears in your eyes on my childhood memory , I know the truth in your smile , I know the truth in your smile , piercing through the gloom of my ignorance .
Gary Lauders new traffic sign : Take Turns
Fifty percent of traffic accidents happen at intersections . Gary Lauder shares a brilliant and cheap idea for helping drivers move along smoothly : a new traffic sign that combines the properties of  Stop  and  Yield . 
I only have three minutes so Im going to have to talk fast , and it will use up your spare mental cycles , so multitasking may be hard .
So , 27 years ago I got a traffic ticket that got me thinking .
Ive had some time to think it over .
And energy efficiency is more than just about the vehicle  -  -  its also about the road .
Road design makes a difference , particularly intersections , of which there are two types : signalized and unsignalized , which means stop signs .
Fifty percent of crashes happen at intersections .
Roundabouts are much better .
A study of 24 intersections has found crashes drop 40 percent from when you convert a traffic light into a roundabout .
Injury crashes have dropped 76 percent , fatal crashes down 90 percent .
But thats just safety .
What about time and gas ?
So , traffic keeps flowing , so that means less braking , which means less accelerating , less gas and less pollution , less time wasted , and that partly accounts for Europes better efficiency than we have in the United States .
So , unsignalized intersections , meaning stop signs , they save many lives , but theres an excessive proliferation of them .
Small roundabouts are starting to appear .
This is one in my neighborhood . And they are much better  -  -  better than traffic lights , better than four - way stop signs .
Theyre expensive to install , but they are more expensive not to . So , we should look at that .
But they are not applicable in all situations .
So , take , for example , the three - way intersection .
So , its logical that youd have one there , on the minor road entering the major .
But the other two are somewhat questionable .
So , heres one . Theres another one which I studied .
Cars rarely appear on that third road .
And so , the question is , what does that cost us ?
That intersection I looked at had about 3,000 cars per day in each direction , and so thats two ounces of gas to accelerate out of .
Thats five cents each , and times 3,000 cars per day , thats $ 51,000 per year .
Thats just the gasoline cost . There is also pollution , wear on the car , and time .
Whats that time worth ?
Well , at 10 seconds per 3,000 cars , thats 8.3 hours per day . The average wage in the U.S .
is $ 20 an hour . That is 60,000 per year .
Add that together with the gas , and its $ 112,000 per year , just for that sign in each direction .
Discount that back to the present , at five percent : over two million dollars for a stop sign , in each direction .
Now , if you look at what that adjacent property is worth , you could actually buy the property , cut down the shrubbery to improve the sight line , and then sell it off again .
And youd still come out ahead .
So , it makes one wonder ,  Why is it there ? 
I mean , why is there that stop sign in each direction ?
Because it is saving lives . So , is there a better way to accomplish that goal ?
The answer is to enable cars to come in from that side road safely .
Because there are a lot of people who might live up there and if theyre waiting forever a long queue could form because the cars arent slowing down on the main road .
Can that be accomplished with existing signs ?
So , there is a long history of stop signs and yield signs .
Stop signs were invented in 1915 , yield signs in 1950 . But thats all we got .
So , why not use a yield sign ?
Well the meaning of yield is : You must yield the right - of - way .
That means that if there are five cars waiting , you have to wait till they all go , then you go . It lacks the notion of alternating , or taking turns , and its always on the minor road , allowing the major one to have primacy .
So , its hard to create a new meaning for the existing sign .
You couldnt suddenly tell everyone ,  OK , remember what you used to do at yield signs ? Now do something different . 
That would not work .
So , what the world needs now is a new type of sign .
So , youd have a little instruction below it , you know , for those who didnt see the public service announcements .
And it merges the stop sign and yield signs .
Its kind of shaped like a T , as in taking turns .
And uncertainty results in caution .
When people come to an unfamiliar situation they dont know how to deal with they slow down .
So , now that you are all  Road Scholars  ...
dont wait for that sign to be adopted , these things dont change quickly .
But you all are members of communities , and you can exercise your community influence to create more sensible traffic flows .
And you can have more impact on the environment just getting your neighborhood to change these things than by changing your vehicle . Thank you very much .
Maira Kalman : The illustrated woman
Author and illustrator Maira Kalman talks about her life and work , from her covers for The New Yorker to her books for children and grown - ups . She is as wonderful , as wise and as deliciously off - kilter in person as she is on paper .
What I am always thinking about is what this session is about , which is called simplicity .
And almost , I would almost call it being simple - minded , but in the best sense of the word .
Im trying to figure out two very simple things : how to live and how to die , period .
Thats all Im trying to do , all day long .
And Im also trying to have some meals , and have some snacks , and , you know , and yell at my children , and do all the normal things that keep you grounded .
So , I was fortunate enough to be born a very dreamy child .
My older sister was busy torturing my parents , and they were busy torturing her .
I was lucky enough to be completely ignored , which is a fabulous thing , actually , I want to tell you .
So , I was able to completely daydream my way through my life .
And I finally daydreamed my way into NYU , at a very good time , in 1967 , where I met a man who was trying to blow up the math building of NYU .
And I was writing terrible poetry and knitting sweaters for him .
And feminists hated us , and the whole thing was wretched from beginning to end .
But I kept writing bad poetry , and he didnt blow up the math building , but he went to Cuba .
But I gave him the money , because I was from Riverdale so I had more money than he did .
And that was a good thing to help , you know , the cause .
But , then he came back , and things happened , and I decided I really hated my writing , that it was awful , awful , purple prose .
And I decided that I wanted to tell  -  -  but I still wanted to tell a narrative story and I still wanted to tell my stories .
So I decided that I would start to draw . How hard could that be ?
And so what happened was that I started just becoming an editorial illustrator through , you know , sheer whatever , sheer ignorance .
And we started a studio .
Well , Tibor really started the studio , called M and Co .
And the premise of M and Co was , we dont know anything , but thats all right , were going to do it anyway .
And as a matter of fact , its better not to know anything , because if you know too much , youre stymied .
So , the premise in the studio was , there are no boundaries , there is no fear .
And I  -  -  and my full - time job , I landed the best job on Earth , was to daydream , and to actually come up with absurd ideas that  -  -  fortunately , there were enough people there , and it was a team , it was a collective , it was not just me coming up with crazy ideas .
But the point was that I was there as myself , as a dreamer .
And so some of the things  -  -  I mean , it was a long history of M and Co , and clearly we also needed to make some money , so we decided we would create a series of products .
And some of the watches there , attempting to be beautiful and humorous  -  -  maybe not attempting , hopefully succeeding .
That to be able to talk about content , to break apart what you normally expect , to use humor and surprise , elegance and humanity in your work was really important to us .
It was a very high , it was a very impersonal time in design and we wanted to say , the content is whats important , not the package , not the wrapping .
You really have to be journalists , you have to be inventors , you have to use your imagination more importantly than anything .
So , the good news is that I have a dog and , though I dont know if I believe in luck  -  -  I dont know what I believe in , its a very complicated question , but I do know that before I go away , I crank his tail seven times .
So , whenever he sees a suitcase in the house , because everybodys always , you know , leaving , theyre always cranking this wonderful dogs tail , and he runs to the other room .
But I am able to make the transition from working for children and  -  -  from working for adults to children , and back and forth , because , you know , I can say that Im immature , and in a way , thats true .
I dont really  -  -  I mean , I could tell you that I didnt understand , Im not proud of it , but I didnt understand lets say 95 percent of the talks at this conference .
But I have been taking beautiful notes of drawings and I have a gorgeous onion from Murray Gell - Manns talk .
And I have a beautiful page of doodles from Jonathan Woodhams talk .
So , good things come out of , you know , incomprehension  -  -   -  -  which I will do a painting of , and then it will end up in my work .
So , Im open to the possibilities of not knowing and finding out something new .
So , in writing for children , it seems simple , and it is .
You have to condense a story into 32 pages , usually .
And what you have to do is , you really have to edit down to what you want to say .
And hopefully , youre not talking down to kids and youre not talking in such a way that you , you know , couldnt stand reading it after one time .
So , I hopefully am writing , you know , books that are good for children and for adults .
But the painting reflects  -  -  I dont think differently for children than I do for adults .
I try to use the same kind of imagination , the same kind of whimsy , the same kind of love of language .
So , you know , and I have lots of wonderful - looking friends .
This is Andrew Gatz , and he walked in through the door and I said ,  You ! Sit down there .  You know , I take lots of photos .
And the Bertoia chair in the background is my favorite chair .
So , I get to put in all of the things that I love .
Hopefully , a dialog between adults and children will happen on many different levels , and hopefully different kinds of humor will evolve .
And the books are really journals of my life .
I never  -  -  I dont like plots .
I dont know what a plot means .
I cant stand the idea of anything that starts in the beginning , you know , beginning , middle and end . It really scares me , because my life is too random and too confused , and I enjoy it that way .
But anyway , so we were in Venice , and this is our room . And I had this dream that I was wearing this fantastic green gown , and I was looking out the window , and it was really a beautiful thing .
And so , I was able to put that into this story , which is an alphabet , and hopefully go on to something else .
The letter C had other things in it .
I was fortunate also , to meet the man whos sitting on the bed , though I gave him hair over here and he doesnt have hair .
Well , he has some hair but  -  -  well , he used to have hair .
And with him , I was able to do a project that was really fantastic .
I work for the New Yorker , and I do covers , and 9 / 11 happened and it was , you know , a complete and utter end of the world as we knew it .
And Rick and I were on our way to a party in the Bronx , and somebody said Bronxistan , and somebody said Ferreristan , and we came up with this New Yorker cover , which we were able to  -  -  we didnt know what we were doing .
We werent trying to be funny , we werent trying to be  -  -  well , we were trying to be funny actually , thats not true .
We hoped wed be funny , but we didnt know it would be a cover , and we didnt know that that image , at the moment that it happened , would be something that would be so wonderful for a lot of people .
And it really became the  -  -  I dont know , you know , it was one of those moments people started laughing at what was going on .
And from , you know , Fattushis , to Taxistan to , you know , for the Fashtoonks , Botoxia , Pashmina , Khlintunisia , you know , we were able to take the city and make fun of this completely foreign , who are  -  -  whats going on over here ?
Who are these people ? What are these tribes ?
And David Remnick , who was really wonderful about it , had one problem . He didnt like Al Zheimers , because he thought it would insult people with Alzheimers .
But you know , we said ,  David , whos going to know ?
Theyre not . 
So it stayed in , and it was , and , you know , it was a good thing .
You know , in the course of my life , I never know whats going to happen and thats kind of the beauty part .
And we were on Cape Cod , a place , obviously , of great inspiration , and I picked up this book ,  The Elements of Style ,  at a yard sale .
And I didnt  -  -  and Id never used it in school , because I was too busy writing poems , and flunking out , and I dont know what , sitting in cafes .
But I picked it up and I started reading it and I thought , this book is amazing .
I said , people should know about this book .
So I decided it needed a few  -  -  it needed a lift , it needed a few illustrations .
And basically , I called the , you know , I convinced the White Estate , and what an intersection of like , you know , Polish Jew , you know , main WASP family . Here I am , saying , Id like to do something to this book .
And they said yes , and they left me completely alone , which was a gorgeous , wonderful thing .
And I took the examples that they gave , and just did 56 paintings , basically .
So , this is , I dont know if you can read this .
 Well , Susan , this is a fine mess you are in . 
And when youre dealing with grammar , which is , you know , incredibly dry , E.B . White wrote such wonderful , whimsical  -  -  and actually , Strunk  -  -  and then you come to the rules and , you know , there are lots of grammar things .  Do you mind me asking a question ?
Do you mind my asking a question ? 
 Would , could , should , or would , should , could . 
And  would  is Coco Chanels lover ,  should  is Edith Sitwell , and  could  is an August Sander subject .
And ,  He noticed a large stain in the center of the rug . 
So , theres a kind of British understatement , murder - mystery theme that I really love very much .
And then ,  Be obscure clearly ! Be wild of tongue in a way we can understand . 
E.B . White wrote us a number of rules , which can either paralyze you and make you loathe him for the rest of time , or you can ignore them , which I do , or you can , I dont know what , you know , eat a sandwich .
So , what I did when I was painting was I started singing , because I really adore singing , and I think that music is the highest form of all art .
So , I commissioned a wonderful composer , Nico Muhly , who wrote nine songs using the text , and we performed this fantastic evening of  -  -  he wrote music for both amateurs and professionals .
I played the clattering teacup and the slinky in the main reading room of the New York Public Library , where youre supposed to be very , very quiet , and it was a phenomenally wonderful event , which we hopefully will do some more .
Who knows ? The New York TimesSelect , the op - ed page , asked me to do a column , and they said , you can do whatever you want .
So , once a month for the last year , Ive been doing a column called  The Principles of Uncertainty ,  which , you know , I dont know who Heisenberg is , but I know I can throw that around now . You know , its the principles of uncertainty , so , you know .
Im going to read quickly  -  -  and probably Im going to edit some , because I dont have that much time left  -  -  a few of the columns .
And basically , I was so , you know , it was so amusing , because I said ,  Well , how much space do I have ? 
And they said ,  Well , you know , its the Internet . 
And I said ,  Yes , but how much space do I have ? 
And they said ,  Its unlimited , its unlimited . 
OK . So , the first one I was very timid , and Ill begin .
 How can I tell you everything that is in my heart ?
Impossible to begin . Enough . No . Begin with the hapless dodo . 
And I talk about the dodo , and how the dodo became extinct , and then I talk about Spinoza .
 As the last dodo was dying , Spinoza was looking for a rational explanation for everything , called eudaemonia .
And then he breathed his last , with loved ones around him , and I know that he had chicken soup also , as his last meal . 
I happen to know it for a fact .
And then he died , and there was no more Spinoza . Extinct .
And then , we dont have a stuffed Spinoza , but we do have a stuffed Pavlovs dog , and I visited him in the Museum of Hygiene in St . Petersburg , in Russia .
And there he is , with this horrible electrical box on his rump in this fantastic , decrepit palace .
 And I think it must have been a very , very dark day when the Bolsheviks arrived .
Maybe amongst themselves they had a few good laughs , but Stalin was a paranoid man , even more than my father . 
You dont even know .
 And decided his top people had to be extinctified . 
Which I think I made up , which is a good thing .
And so , this is a chart of , you know , just a small chart , because the chart would go on forever of all the people that he killed .
So , shot dead , smacked over the head , you know , thrown away .
 Nabokovs family fled Russia . How could the young Nabokov , sitting innocently and elegantly in a red chair , leafing through a book and butterflies , imagine such displacement , such loss ? 
And then I want to tell you that this is a map .
So ,  My beautiful mothers family fled Russia as well .
Too many pogroms .
Leaving the shack , the wild blueberry woods , the geese , the River Sluch , they went to Palestine and then America . 
And my mother drew this map for me of the United States of America , and that is my DNA over here , because that person who I grew up with had no use for facts whatsoever .
Facts were actually banished from our home .
And so , if you see that Texas  -  -  you know , Texas and California are under Canada , and that South Carolina is on top of North Carolina , this is the home that I grew up in , OK ?
So , its a miracle that Im here today .
But actually , its not . Its actually a wonderful thing .
But then she says Tel Aviv and Lenin , which is the town they came from , and ,  Sorry , the rest unknown , thank you . 
But in her lexicon ,  sorry , the rest unknown , thank you  is  sorry , the rest unknown , go to hell ,  because she couldnt care less .
 The Impossibility of February  is that Februarys a really wretched month in New York and the images for me conjure up these really awful things .
Well , not so awful .
I received a box in the mail and it was wrapped with newspaper and there was the picture of the man on the newspaper and he was dead .
And I say ,  I hope hes not really dead , just enjoying a refreshing lie - down in the snow , but the caption says he is dead . 
And actually , he was . I think hes dead , though I dont know , maybe hes not dead .
 And this woman leans over in anguish , not about that man , but about all sad things . It happens quite often in February . 
Theres consoling .
This man is angry because somebody threw onions all over the staircase , and basically  -  -  you know , I guess onions are a theme here .
And he says ,  It is impossible not to lie .
It is February and not lying is impossible . 
And I really spend a lot of time wondering , how much truth do we tell ?
What is it that were actually  -  -  what story are we actually telling ?
How do we know when we are ourselves ?
How do we actually know that these sentences coming out of our mouths are real stories , you know , are real sentences ?
Or are they fake sentences that we think we ought to be saying ?
Im going to quickly go through this .
A quote by Bertrand Russell ,  All the labor of all the ages , all the devotion , all the inspiration , all the noonday brightness of human genius are destined to extinction .
So now , my friends , if that is true , and it is true , what is the point ? 
A complicated question .
And so , you know , I talk to my friends and I go to plays where theyre singing Russian songs .
Oh my God , you know what ?
Could we have  -  -  no , we dont have time .
I taped my aunt . I taped my aunt singing a song in Russian from the  -  -  you know , could we have it for a second ?
Do you have that ?
OK . I taped my  -  -  my aunt used to swim in the ocean every day of the year until she was about 85 .
So  -  -  and thats a song about how everybodys miserable because , you know , were from Russia .
I went to visit Kitty Carlisle Hart , and she is 96 , and when I brought her a copy of  The Elements of Style ,  she said she would treasure it .
And then I said  -  -  oh , and she was talking about Moss Hart , and I said ,  When you met him , you knew it was him . 
And she said ,  I knew it was he . 
So , I was the one who should have kept the book , but it was a really wonderful moment .
And she dated George Gershwin , so , you know , get out .
Gershwin died at the age of 38 .
Hes buried in the same cemetery as my husband .
I dont want to talk about that now .
I do want to talk  -  -  the absolute icing on this cemetery cake is the Barricini family mausoleum nearby .
I think the Barricini family should open a store there and sell chocolate .
And I would like to run it for them .
And I went to visit Louise Bourgeoise , whos also still working , and I looked at her sink , which is really amazing , and left .
And then I photograph and do a painting of a sofa on the street .
And a woman who lives on our street , Lolita .
And then I go and have some tea .
And then my Aunt Frances dies , and before she died , she tried to pay with SweetN Low packets for her bagel .
And I wonder what the point is and then I know , and I see that Hy Meyerowitz , Rick Meyerowitzs father , a dry - cleaning supply salesman from the Bronx , won the Charlie Chaplin look - alike contest in 1931 .
Thats actually Hy .
And I look at a beautiful bowl of fruit , and I look at a dress that I sewed for friends of mine .
And it says ,  Ich habe genug ,  which is a Bach cantata , which I once thought meant  Ive had it , I cant take it anymore , give me a break ,  but I was wrong .
It means  I have enough .  And that is utterly true .
I happen to be alive , end of discussion . Thank you .
Gabe Barcia - Colombo : My DNA vending machine
Vending machines generally offer up sodas , candy bars and chips . Not so for the one created by TED Fellow Gabe Barcia - Colombo . This artist has dreamed up a DNA Vending Machine , which dispenses extracted human DNA , packaged in a vial along with a collectible photo of the person who gave it . Its charming and quirky , but points out larger ethical issues that will arise as access to biotechnology increases .
This is a vending machine in Los Angeles .
Its in a shopping mall , and it sells fish eggs .
Its a caviar vending machine .
This is the Art - o - mat , an art vending machine that sells small artistic creations by different artists , usually on small wood blocks or matchboxes , in limited edition .
This is Oliver Medvedik . Hes not a vending machine , but he is one of the founders of Genspace , a community biolab in Brooklyn , New York , where anybody can go and take classes and learn how to do things like grow E. coli that glows in the dark or learn how to take strawberry DNA .
In fact , I saw Oliver do one of these strawberry DNA extractions about a year ago , and this is what led me onto this bizarre path that Im going to talk to you right now .
Because strawberry DNA is really fascinating , because its so beautiful .
Id never thought about DNA being a beautiful thing before , before I saw it in this form .
And a lot of people , especially in the art community , dont necessarily engage in science in this way .
I instantly joined Genspace after this , and I asked Oliver ,  Well , if we can do this strawberries , can we do this with people as well ? 
And about 10 minutes later , we were both spinning it in vials together and coming up with a protocol for human DNA extraction .
And I started doing this on my own , and this is what my DNA actually looks like .
And I was at a dinner party with some friends , some artist friends , and I was telling them about this project , and they couldnt believe that you could actually see DNA .
So I said , all right , lets get out some supplies right now .
And I started having these bizarre dinner parties at my house on Friday nights where people would come over and we would do DNA extractions , and I would actually capture them on video , because it created this kind of funny portrait as well .
These are people who dont necessarily regularly engage with science whatsoever .
You can kind of tell from their reactions .
But they became fascinated by it , and it was really exciting for me to see them get excited about science .
And so I started doing this regularly .
Its kind of an odd thing to do with your Friday nights , but this is what I started doing , and I started collecting a whole group of my friends DNA in small vials and categorizing them .
This is what that looked like .
And it started to make me think about a couple of things .
First of all , this looked a lot like my Facebook wall .
So in a way , Ive created sort of a genetic network , a genetic social network , really .
And the second thing was , one time a friend came over and looked at this on my table and was like ,  Oh .
Why are they numbered ? Is this person more rare than the other one ? 
And I hadnt even thought about that .
They were just numbered because that was the order that I extracted the DNA in .
But that made me think about collecting toys , and this thing thats going on right now in the toy world with blind box toys , and being able to collect these rare toys .
You buy these boxes . Youre not sure whats going to be inside of them .
But then , when you open them up , you have different rarities of the toys .
And so I thought that was interesting .
I started thinking about this and the caviar vending machine and the Art - o - mat all together , and some reason , I was one night drawing a vending machine , thinking about doing paintings of a vending machine , and the little vial of my DNA was sitting there , and I saw this kind of beautiful collaboration between the strands of DNA and the coils of a vending machine .
And so , of course , I decided to create an art installation called the DNA Vending Machine .
Here it is .
  DNA Vending Machine is an art installation about our increasing access to biotechnology .     For a reasonable cost , you can purchase a sample of human DNA from a traditional vending machine .     Each sample comes packaged with a collectible limited edition portrait of the human specimen .     DNA Vending Machine treats DNA as a collectible material and brings to light legal issues over the ownership of DNA .   Gabriel Garcia - Colombo : So the DNA Vending Machine is currently in a couple galleries in New York , and its selling out pretty well , actually .
Were in the first edition of 100 pieces , hoping to do another edition pretty soon .
Id actually like to get it into more of a metro hub , like Grand Central or Penn Station , right next to some of the other , actual vending machines in that location .
But really with this project and a lot of my art projects I want to ask the audience a question , and that is , when biotechnology and DNA sequencing becomes as cheap as , say , laser cutting or 3D printing or buying caviar from a vending machine , will you still submit your sample of DNA to be part of the vending machine ?
And how much will these samples be worth ?
And will you buy someone elses sample ?
And what will you be able to do with that sample ?
Thank you .
Dan Dennett : The illusion of consciousness
Philosopher Dan Dennett makes a compelling argument that not only dont we understand our own consciousness , but that half the time our brains are actively fooling us .
So Im going to speak about a problem that I have and thats that Im a philosopher .
When I go to a party and people ask me what do I do and I say ,  Im a professor ,  their eyes glaze over .
When I go to an academic cocktail party and there are all the professors around , they ask me what field Im in and I say ,  philosophy   -  -  their eyes glaze over .
When I go to a philosophers party and they ask me what I work on and I say ,  consciousness ,  their eyes dont glaze over  -  -  their lips curl into a snarl .
And I get hoots of derision and cackles and growls because they think ,  Thats impossible ! You cant explain consciousness . 
The very chutzpah of somebody thinking that you could explain consciousness is just out of the question .
My late , lamented friend Bob Nozick , a fine philosopher , in one of his books ,  Philosophical Explanations ,  is commenting on the ethos of philosophy  -  -  the way philosophers go about their business .
And he says , you know ,  Philosophers love rational argument . 
And he says ,  It seems as if the ideal argument for most philosophers is you give your audience the premises and then you give them the inferences and the conclusion , and if they dont accept the conclusion , they die .
Their heads explode .  The idea is to have an argument that is so powerful that it knocks out your opponents .
But in fact that doesnt change peoples minds at all .
Its very hard to change peoples minds about something like consciousness , and I finally figured out the reason for that .
The reason for that is that everybodys an expert on consciousness .
We heard the other day that everybodys got a strong opinion about video games .
They all have an idea for a video game , even if theyre not experts .
But they dont consider themselves experts on video games ; theyve just got strong opinions .
Im sure that people here who work on , say , climate change and global warming , or on the future of the Internet , encounter people who have very strong opinions about whats going to happen next .
But they probably dont think of these opinions as expertise .
Theyre just strongly held opinions .
But with regard to consciousness , people seem to think , each of us seems to think ,  I am an expert .
Simply by being conscious , I know all about this . 
And so , you tell them your theory and they say ,  No , no , thats not the way consciousness is !
No , youve got it all wrong . 
And they say this with an amazing confidence .
And so what Im going to try to do today is to shake your confidence . Because I know the feeling  -  -  I can feel it myself .
I want to shake your confidence that you know your own innermost minds  -  -  that you are , yourselves , authoritative about your own consciousness .
Thats the order of the day here .
Now , this nice picture shows a thought - balloon , a thought - bubble .
I think everybody understands what that means .
Thats supposed to exhibit the stream of consciousness .
This is my favorite picture of consciousness thats ever been done .
Its a Saul Steinberg of course  -  -  it was a New Yorker cover .
And this fellow here is looking at the painting by Braque .
That reminds him of the word baroque , barrack , bark , poodle , Suzanne R.  -  -  hes off to the races .
Theres a wonderful stream of consciousness here and if you follow it along , you learn a lot about this man .
What I particularly like about this picture , too , is that Steinberg has rendered the guy in this sort of pointillist style .
Which reminds us , as Rod Brooks was saying yesterday : what we are , what each of us is  -  -  what you are , what I am  -  -  is approximately 100 trillion little cellular robots .
Thats what were made of .
No other ingredients at all . Were just made of cells , about 100 trillion of them .
Not a single one of those cells is conscious ; not a single one of those cells knows who you are , or cares .
Somehow , we have to explain how when you put together teams , armies , battalions of hundreds of millions of little robotic unconscious cells  -  -  not so different really from a bacterium , each one of them  -  -  the result is this . I mean , just look at it .
The content  -  -  theres color , theres ideas , theres memories , theres history . And somehow all that content of consciousness is accomplished by the busy activity of those hoards of neurons .
How is that possible ? Many people just think it isnt possible at all .
They think ,  No , there cant be any sort of naturalistic explanation of consciousness . 
This is a lovely book by a friend of mine named Lee Siegel , whos a professor of religion , actually , at the University of Hawaii , and hes an expert magician , and an expert on the street magic of India , which is what this book is about ,  Net of Magic . 
And theres a passage in it which I would love to share with you .
It speaks so eloquently to the problem .
 Im writing a book on magic , I explain , and Im asked , Real magic ? By real magic , people mean miracles , thaumaturgical acts , and supernatural powers .
No , I answer . Conjuring tricks , not real magic . Real magic , in other words , refers to the magic that is not real ; while the magic that is real , that can actually be done , is not real magic . 
Now , thats the way a lot of people feel about consciousness .
Real consciousness is not a bag of tricks .
If youre going to explain this as a bag of tricks , then its not real consciousness , whatever it is .
And , as Marvin said , and as other people have said ,  Consciousness is a bag of tricks . 
This means that a lot of people are just left completely dissatisfied and incredulous when I attempt to explain consciousness .
So this is the problem . So I have to that a lot of you wont like , for the same reason that you dont like to see a magic trick explained to you .
How many of you here , if somebody  -  -  some smart aleck  -  -  starts telling you how a particular magic trick is done , you sort of want to block your ears and say ,  No , no , I dont want to know !
Dont take the thrill of it away . Id rather be mystified .
Dont tell me the answer . 
A lot of people feel that way about consciousness , Ive discovered .
And Im sorry if I impose some clarity , some understanding on you .
Youd better leave now if you dont want to know some of these tricks .
But Im not going to explain it all to you .
Im going to do what philosophers do .
Heres how a philosopher explains the sawing - the - lady - in - half trick .
You know the sawing - the - lady - in - half trick ?
The philosopher says ,  Im going to explain to you how thats done .
You see , the magician doesnt really saw the lady in half . 
 He merely makes you think that he does . 
And you say ,  Yes , and how does he do that ? 
He says ,  Oh , thats not my department , Im sorry . 
So now Im going to illustrate how philosophers explain consciousness .
But Im going to try to also show you that consciousness isnt quite as marvelous  -  -  your own consciousness isnt quite as wonderful  -  -  as you may have thought it is .
This is something , by the way , that Lee Siegel talks about in his book .
He marvels at how hell do a magic show , and afterwards people will swear they saw him do X , Y , and Z . He never did those things .
He didnt even try to do those things .
Peoples memories inflate what they think they saw .
And the same is true of consciousness .
Now , lets see if this will work . All right . Lets just watch this .
Watch it carefully .
Im working with a young computer - animator documentarian named Nick Deamer , and this is a little demo that hes done for me , part of a larger project some of you may be interested in .
Were looking for a backer .
Its a feature - length documentary on consciousness .
OK , now , you all saw what changed , right ?
How many of you noticed that every one of those squares changed color ?
Every one . Ill just show you by running it again .
Even when you know that theyre all going to change color , its very hard to notice . You have to really concentrate to pick up any of the changes at all .
Now , this is an example  -  -  one of many  -  -  of a phenomenon thats now being studied quite a bit .
Its one that I predicted in the last page or two of my 1991 book ,  Consciousness Explained ,  where I said if you did experiments of this sort , youd find that people were unable to pick up really large changes .
If theres time at the end , Ill show you the much more dramatic case .
Now , how can it be that there are all those changes going on , and that were not aware of them ?
Well , earlier today , Jeff Hawkins mentioned the way your eye saccades , the way your eye moves around three or four times a second .
He didnt mention the speed . Your eye is constantly in motion , moving around , looking at eyes , noses , elbows , looking at interesting things in the world .
And where your eye isnt looking , youre remarkably impoverished in your vision .
Thats because the foveal part of your eye , which is the high - resolution part , is only about the size of your thumbnail held at arms length .
Thats the detail part .
It doesnt seem that way , does it ?
It doesnt seem that way , but thats the way it is .
Youre getting in a lot less information than you think .
Heres a completely different effect . This is a painting by Bellotto .
Its in the museum in North Carolina .
Bellotto was a student of Canalettos .
And I love paintings like that  -  -  the painting is actually about as big as it is right here .
And I love Canalettos , because Canaletto has this fantastic detail , and you can get right up and see all the details on the painting .
And I started across the hall in North Carolina , because I thought it was probably a Canaletto , and would have all that in detail .
And I noticed that on the bridge there , theres a lot of people  -  -  you can just barely see them walking across the bridge .
And I thought as I got closer I would be able to see all the detail of most people , see their clothes , and so forth .
And as I got closer and closer , I actually screamed .
I yelled out because when I got closer , I found the detail wasnt there at all .
There were just little artfully placed blobs of paint .
And as I walked towards the picture , I was expecting detail that wasnt there .
The artist had very cleverly suggested people and clothes and wagons and all sorts of things , and my brain had taken the suggestion .
Youre familiar with a more recent technology , which is  -  -  There , you can get a better view of the blobs .
See , when you get close theyre really just blobs of paint .
You will have seen something like this  -  -  this is the reverse effect .
Ill just give that to you one more time .
Now , what does your brain do when it takes the suggestion ?
When an artful blob of paint or two , by an artist , suggests a person  -  -  say , one of Marvin Minskys little society of mind  -  -  do they send little painters out to fill in all the details in your brain somewhere ?
I dont think so . Not a chance . But then , how on Earth is it done ?
Well , remember the philosophers explanation of the lady ?
Its the same thing .
The brain just makes you think that its got the detail there .
You think the details there , but it isnt there .
The brain isnt actually putting the detail in your head at all .
Its just making you expect the detail .
Lets just do this experiment very quickly .
Is the shape on the left the same as the shape on the right , rotated ?
Yes .
How many of you did it by rotating the one on the left in your minds eye , to see if it matched up with the one on the right ?
How many of you rotated the one on the right ? OK .
How do you know thats what you did ?
Theres in fact been a very interesting debate raging for over 20 years in cognitive science  -  -  various experiments started by Roger Shepherd , who measured the angular velocity of rotation of mental images .
Yes , its possible to do that .
But the details of the process are still in significant controversy .
And if you read that literature , one of the things that you really have to come to terms with is even when youre the subject in the experiment , you dont know .
You dont know how you do it .
You just know that you have certain beliefs .
And they come in a certain order , at a certain time .
And what explains the fact that thats what you think ?
Well , thats where you have to go backstage and ask the magician .
This is a figure that I love : Bradley , Petrie , and Dumais .
You may think that Ive cheated , that Ive put a little whiter - than - white boundary there .
How many of you see that sort of boundary , with the Necker cube floating in front of the circles ?
Can you see it ?
Well , you know , in effect , the boundarys really there , in a certain sense .
Your brain is actually computing that boundary , the boundary that goes right there .
But now , notice there are two ways of seeing the cube , right ?
Its a Necker cube .
Everybody can see the two ways of seeing the cube ? OK .
Can you see the four ways of seeing the cube ?
Because theres another way of seeing it .
If youre seeing it as a cube floating in front of some circles , some black circles , theres another way of seeing it .
As a cube , on a black background , as seen through a piece of Swiss cheese .
Can you get it ? How many of you cant get it ? Thatll help .
Now you can get it . These are two very different phenomena .
When you see the cube one way , behind the screen , those boundaries go away .
But theres still a sort of filling in , as we can tell if we look at this .
We dont have any trouble seeing the cube , but where does the color change ?
Does your brain have to send little painters in there ?
The purple - painters and the green - painters fight over whos going to paint that bit behind the curtain ? No .
Your brain just lets it go . The brain doesnt need to fill that in .
When I first started talking about the Bradley , Petrie , Dumais example that you just saw  -  -  Ill go back to it , this one  -  -  I said that there was no filling - in behind there .
And I supposed that that was just a flat truth , always true .
But Rob Van Lier has recently shown that it isnt .
Now , if you think you see some pale yellow  -  -  Ill run this a few more times .
Look in the gray areas , and see if you seem to see something sort of shadowy moving in there  -  -  yeah , its amazing . Theres nothing there . Its no trick .
  Failure to Detect Changes in Scenes  slide  This is Ron Rensinks work , which was in some degree inspired by that suggestion right at the end of the book .
Let me just pause this for a second if I can .
This is change - blindness .
What youre going to see is two pictures , one of which is slightly different from the other .
You see here the red roof and the gray roof , and in between them there will be a mask , which is just a blank screen , for about a quarter of a second .
So youll see the first picture , then a mask , then the second picture , then a mask .
And this will just continue , and your job as the subject is to press the button when you see the change .
So , show the original picture for 240 milliseconds . Blank .
Show the next picture for 240 milliseconds . Blank .
And keep going , until the subject presses the button , saying ,  I see the change . 
So now were going to be subjects in the experiment .
Were going to start easy . Some examples .
No trouble there .
Can everybody see ? All right .
Indeed , Rensinks subjects took only a little bit more than a second to press the button .
Can you see that one ?
2.9 seconds .
How many dont see it still ?
Whats on the roof of that barn ?
Its easy .
Is it a bridge or a dock ?
There are a few more really dramatic ones , and then Ill close .
I want you to see a few that are particularly striking .
This one because its so large and yet its pretty hard to see .
Can you see it ?
Audience : Yes .
Dan Dennett : See the shadows going back and forth ? Pretty big .
So 15.5 seconds is the median time for subjects in his experiment there .
I love this one . Ill end with this one , just because its such an obvious and important thing .
How many still dont see it ? How many still dont see it ?
How many engines on the wing of that Boeing ?
Right in the middle of the picture !
Thanks very much for your attention .
What I wanted to show you is that scientists , using their from - the - outside , third - person methods , can tell you things about your own consciousness that you would never dream of , and that , in fact , youre not the authority on your own consciousness that you think you are .
And were really making a lot of progress on coming up with a theory of mind .
Jeff Hawkins , this morning , was describing his attempt to get theory , and a good , big theory , into the neuroscience .
And hes right . This is a problem .
Harvard Medical School once  -  -  I was at a talk  -  -  director of the lab said ,  In our lab , we have a saying .
If you work on one neuron , thats neuroscience .
If you work on two neurons , thats psychology . 
We have to have more theory , and it can come as much from the top down .
Thank you very much .
Danny Hillis : The Internet could crash . We need a Plan B
In the 1970s and 1980s , a generous spirit suffused the Internet , whose users were few and far between . But today , the net is ubiquitous , connecting billions of people , machines and essential pieces of infrastructure  -  -  leaving us vulnerable to cyber - attack or meltdown . Internet pioneer Danny Hillis argues that the Internet wasnt designed for this kind of scale , and sounds a clarion call for us to develop a Plan B : a parallel system to fall back on if  -  -  or when  -  -  the Internet crashes .
So , this book that I have in my hand is a directory of everybody who had an email address in 1982 .
Actually , its deceptively large .
Theres actually only about 20 people on each page , because we have the name , address and telephone number of every single person .
And , in fact , everybodys listed twice , because its sorted once by name and once by email address .
Obviously a very small community .
There were only two other Dannys on the Internet then .
I knew them both .
We didnt all know each other , but we all kind of trusted each other , and that basic feeling of trust permeated the whole network , and there was a real sense that we could depend on each other to do things .
So just to give you an idea of the level of trust in this community , let me tell you what it was like to register a domain name in the early days .
Now , it just so happened that I got to register the third domain name on the Internet .
So I could have anything I wanted other than bbn.com and symbolics.com .
So I picked think.com , but then I thought , you know , theres a lot of really interesting names out there .
Maybe I should register a few extras just in case .
And then I thought ,  Nah , that wouldnt be very nice . 
That attitude of only taking what you need was really what everybody had on the network in those days , and in fact , it wasnt just the people on the network , but it was actually kind of built into the protocols of the Internet itself .
So the basic idea of I.P . , or Internet protocol , and the way that the  -  -  the routing algorithm that used it , were fundamentally  from each according to their ability , to each according to their need . 
And so , if you had some extra bandwidth , youd deliver a message for someone .
If they had some extra bandwidth , they would deliver a message for you .
Youd kind of depend on people to do that , and that was the building block .
It was actually interesting that such a communist principle was the basis of a system developed during the Cold War by the Defense Department , but it obviously worked really well , and we all saw what happened with the Internet .
It was incredibly successful .
In fact , it was so successful that theres no way that these days you could make a book like this .
My rough calculation is it would be about 25 miles thick .
But , of course , you couldnt do it , because we dont know the names of all the people with Internet or email addresses , and even if we did know their names , Im pretty sure that they would not want their name , address and telephone number published to everyone .
So the fact is that theres a lot of bad guys on the Internet these days , and so we dealt with that by making walled communities , secure subnetworks , VPNs , little things that arent really the Internet but are made out of the same building blocks , but were still basically building it out of those same building blocks with those same assumptions of trust .
And that means that its vulnerable to certain kinds of mistakes that can happen , or certain kinds of deliberate attacks , but even the mistakes can be bad .
So , for instance , in all of Asia recently , it was impossible to get YouTube for a little while because Pakistan made some mistakes in how it was censoring YouTube in its internal network .
They didnt intend to screw up Asia , but they did because of the way that the protocols work .
Another example that may have affected many of you in this audience is , you may remember a couple of years ago , all the planes west of the Mississippi were grounded because a single routing card in Salt Lake City had a bug in it .
Now , you dont really think that our airplane system depends on the Internet , and in some sense it doesnt .
Ill come back to that later .
But the fact is that people couldnt take off because something was going wrong on the Internet , and the router card was down .
And so , there are many of those things that start to happen .
Now , there was an interesting thing that happened last April .
All of a sudden , a very large percentage of the traffic on the whole Internet , including a lot of the traffic between U.S . military installations , started getting re - routed through China .
So for a few hours , it all passed through China .
Now , China Telecom says it was just an honest mistake , and it is actually possible that it was , the way things work , but certainly somebody could make a dishonest mistake of that sort if they wanted to , and it shows you how vulnerable the system is even to mistakes .
Imagine how vulnerable the system is to deliberate attacks .
So if somebody really wanted to attack the United States or Western civilization these days , theyre not going to do it with tanks .
That will not succeed .
What theyll probably do is something very much like the attack that happened on the Iranian nuclear facility .
Nobody has claimed credit for that .
There was basically a factory of industrial machines .
It didnt think of itself as being on the Internet .
It thought of itself as being disconnected from the Internet , but it was possible for somebody to smuggle a USB drive in there , or something like that , and software got in there that causes the centrifuges , in that case , to actually destroy themselves .
Now that same kind of software could destroy an oil refinery or a pharmaceutical factory or a semiconductor plant .
And so theres a lot of  -  -  Im sure youve read a lot in papers , about worries about cyberattacks and defenses against those .
But the fact is , people are mostly focused on defending the computers on the Internet , and theres been surprisingly little attention to defending the Internet itself as a communications medium .
And I think we probably do need to pay some more attention to that , because its actually kind of fragile .
So actually , in the early days , back when it was the ARPANET , there were actually times  -  -  there was a particular time it failed completely because one single message processor actually got a bug in it .
And the way the Internet works is the routers are basically exchanging information about how they can get messages to places , and this one processor , because of a broken card , decided it could actually get a message to some place in negative time .
So , in other words , it claimed it could deliver a message before you sent it .
So of course , the fastest way to get a message anywhere was to send it to this guy , who would send it back in time and get it there super early , so every message in the Internet started getting switched through this one node , and of course that clogged everything up .
Everything started breaking .
The interesting thing was , though , that the sysadmins were able to fix it , but they had to basically turn every single thing on the Internet off .
Now , of course you couldnt do that today .
I mean , everything off , its like the service call you get from the cable company , except for the whole world .
Now , in fact , they couldnt do it for a lot of reasons today .
One of the reasons is a lot of their telephones use IP protocol and use things like Skype and so on that go through the Internet right now , and so in fact were becoming dependent on it for more and more different things , like when you take off from LAX , youre really not thinking youre using the Internet .
When you pump gas , you really dont think youre using the Internet .
Whats happening increasingly , though , is these systems are beginning to use the Internet .
Most of them arent based on the Internet yet , but theyre starting to use the Internet for service functions , for administrative functions , and so if you take something like the cell phone system , which is still relatively independent of the Internet for the most part , Internet pieces are beginning to sneak into it in terms of some of the control and administrative functions , and its so tempting to use these same building blocks because they work so well , theyre cheap , theyre repeated , and so on .
So all of our systems , more and more , are starting to use the same technology and starting to depend on this technology .
And so even a modern rocket ship these days actually uses Internet protocol to talk from one end of the rocket ship to the other .
Thats crazy . It was never designed to do things like that .
So weve built this system where we understand all the parts of it , but were using it in a very , very different way than we expected to use it , and its gotten a very , very different scale than it was designed for .
And in fact , nobody really exactly understands all the things its being used for right now .
Its turning into one of these big emergent systems like the financial system , where weve designed all the parts but nobody really exactly understands how it operates and all the little details of it and what kinds of emergent behaviors it can have .
And so if you hear an expert talking about the Internet and saying it can do this , or it does do this , or it will do that , you should treat it with the same skepticism that you might treat the comments of an economist about the economy or a weatherman about the weather , or something like that .
They have an informed opinion , but its changing so quickly that even the experts dont know exactly whats going on .
So if you see one of these maps of the Internet , its just somebodys guess .
Nobody really knows what the Internet is right now because its different than it was an hour ago .
Its constantly changing . Its constantly reconfiguring .
And the problem with it is , I think we are setting ourselves up for a kind of disaster like the disaster we had in the financial system , where we take a system thats basically built on trust , was basically built for a smaller - scale system , and weve kind of expanded it way beyond the limits of how it was meant to operate .
And so right now , I think its literally true that we dont know what the consequences of an effective denial - of - service attack on the Internet would be , and whatever it would be is going to be worse next year , and worse next year , and so on .
But so what we need is a plan B .
There is no plan B right now .
Theres no clear backup system that weve very carefully kept to be independent of the Internet , made out of completely different sets of building blocks .
So what we need is something that doesnt necessarily have to have the performance of the Internet , but the police department has to be able to call up the fire department even without the Internet , or the hospitals have to order fuel oil .
This doesnt need to be a multi - billion - dollar government project .
Its actually relatively simple to do , technically , because it can use existing fibers that are in the ground , existing wireless infrastructure .
Its basically a matter of deciding to do it .
But people wont decide to do it until they recognize the need for it , and thats the problem that we have right now .
So theres been plenty of people , plenty of us have been quietly arguing that we should have this independent system for years , but its very hard to get people focused on plan B when plan A seems to be working so well .
So I think that , if people understand how much were starting to depend on the Internet , and how vulnerable it is , we could get focused on just wanting this other system to exist , and I think if enough people say ,  Yeah , I would like to use it , Id like to have such a system ,  then it will get built .
Its not that hard a problem .
It could definitely be done by people in this room .
And so I think that this is actually , of all the problems youre going to hear about at the conference , this is probably one of the very easiest to fix .
So Im happy to get a chance to tell you about it .
Thank you very much .
Stefan Larsson : What doctors can learn from each other
Different hospitals produce different results on different procedures . Only , patients dont know that data , making choosing a surgeon a high - stakes guessing game . Stefan Larsson looks at what happens when doctors measure and share their outcomes on hip replacement surgery , for example , to see which techniques are proving the most effective . Could health care get better  -  -  and cheaper  -  -  if doctors learn from each other in a continuous feedback loop ?
Five years ago , I was on a sabbatical , and I returned to the medical university where I studied .
I saw real patients and I wore the white coat for the first time in 17 years , in fact since I became a management consultant .
There were two things that surprised me during the month I spent .
The first one was that the common theme of the discussions we had were hospital budgets and cost - cutting , and the second thing , which really bothered me , actually , was that several of the colleagues I met , former friends from medical school , who I knew to be some of the smartest , most motivated , engaged and passionate people Id ever met , many of them had turned cynical , disengaged , or had distanced themselves from hospital management .
So with this focus on cost - cutting , I asked myself , are we forgetting the patient ?
Many countries that you represent and where I come from struggle with the cost of healthcare .
Its a big part of the national budgets .
And many different reforms aim at holding back this growth .
In some countries , we have long waiting times for patients for surgery .
In other countries , new drugs are not being reimbursed , and therefore dont reach patients .
In several countries , doctors and nurses are the targets , to some extent , for the governments .
After all , the costly decisions in health care are taken by doctors and nurses .
You choose an expensive lab test , you choose to operate on an old and frail patient .
So , by limiting the degrees of freedom of physicians , this is a way to hold costs down .
And ultimately , some physicians will say today that they dont have the full liberty to make the choices they think are right for their patients .
So no wonder that some of my old colleagues are frustrated .
At BCG , we looked at this , and we asked ourselves , this cant be the right way of managing healthcare .
And so we took a step back and we said ,  What is it that we are trying to achieve ? 
Ultimately , in the healthcare system , were aiming at improving health for the patients , and we need to do so at a limited , or affordable , cost .
We call this value - based healthcare .
On the screen behind me , you see what we mean by value : outcomes that matter to patients relative to the money we spend .
This was described beautifully in a book in 2006 by Michael Porter and Elizabeth Teisberg .
On this picture , you have my father - in - law surrounded by his three beautiful daughters .
When we started doing our research at BCG , we decided not to look so much at the costs , but to look at the quality instead , and in the research , one of the things that fascinated us was the variation we saw .
You compare hospitals in a country , youll find some that are extremely good , but youll find a large number that are vastly much worse .
The differences were dramatic .
Erik , my father - in - law , he suffers from prostate cancer , and he probably needs surgery .
Now living in Europe , he can choose to go to Germany that has a well - reputed healthcare system .
If he goes there and goes to the average hospital , he will have the risk of becoming incontinent by about 50 percent , so he would have to start wearing diapers again .
You flip a coin . Fifty percent risk . Thats quite a lot .
If he instead would go to Hamburg , and to a clinic called the Martini - Klinik , the risk would be only one in 20 .
Either you a flip a coin , or you have a one in 20 risk .
Thats a huge difference , a seven - fold difference .
When we look at many hospitals for many different diseases , we see these huge differences .
But you and I dont know . We dont have the data .
And often , the data actually doesnt exist .
Nobody knows .
So going the hospital is a lottery .
Now , it doesnt have to be that way . There is hope .
In the late 70s , there were a group of Swedish orthopedic surgeons who met at their annual meeting , and they were discussing the different procedures they used to operate hip surgery .
To the left of this slide , you see a variety of metal pieces , artificial hips that you would use for somebody who needs a new hip .
They all realized they had their individual way of operating .
They all argued that ,  My technique is the best ,  but none of them actually knew , and they admitted that .
So they said ,  We probably need to measure quality so we know and can learn from whats best . 
So they in fact spent two years debating ,  So what is quality in hip surgery ? 
 Oh , we should measure this .   No , we should measure that . 
And they finally agreed .
And once they had agreed , they started measuring , and started sharing the data .
Very quickly , they found that if you put cement in the bone of the patient before you put the metal shaft in , it actually lasted a lot longer , and most patients would never have to be re - operated on in their lifetime .
They published the data , and it actually transformed clinical practice in the country .
Everybody saw this makes a lot of sense .
Since then , they publish every year .
Once a year , they publish the league table : whos best , whos at the bottom ?
And they visit each other to try to learn , so a continuous cycle of improvement .
For many years , Swedish hip surgeons had the best results in the world , at least for those who actually were measuring , and many were not .
Now I found this principle really exciting .
So the physicians get together , they agree on what quality is , they start measuring , they share the data , they find whos best , and they learn from it .
Continuous improvement .
Now , thats not the only exciting part .
Thats exciting in itself .
But if you bring back the cost side of the equation , and look at that , it turns out , those who have focused on quality , they actually also have the lowest costs , although thats not been the purpose in the first place .
So if you look at the hip surgery story again , there was a study done a couple years ago where they compared the U.S . and Sweden .
They looked at how many patients have needed to be re - operated on seven years after the first surgery .
In the United States , the number was three times higher than in Sweden .
So many unnecessary surgeries , and so much unnecessary suffering for all the patients who were operated on in that seven year period .
Now , you can imagine how much savings there would be for society .
We did a study where we looked at OECD data .
OECD does , every so often , look at quality of care where they can find the data across the member countries .
The United States has , for many diseases , actually a quality which is below the average in OECD .
Now , if the American healthcare system would focus a lot more on measuring quality , and raise quality just to the level of average OECD , it would save the American people 500 billion U.S . dollars a year .
Thats 20 percent of the budget , of the healthcare budget of the country .
Now you may say that these numbers are fantastic , and its all logical , but is it possible ?
This would be a paradigm shift in healthcare , and I would argue that not only can it be done , but it has to be done .
The agents of change are the doctors and nurses in the healthcare system .
In my practice as a consultant , I meet probably a hundred or more than a hundred doctors and nurses and other hospital or healthcare staff every year .
The one thing they have in common is they really care about what they achieve in terms of quality for their patients .
Physicians are , like most of you in the audience , very competitive .
They were always best in class .
We were always best in class .
And if somebody can show them that the result they perform for their patients is no better than what others do , they will do whatever it takes to improve .
But most of them dont know .
But physicians have another characteristic .
They actually thrive from peer recognition .
If a cardiologist calls another cardiologist in a competing hospital and discusses why that other hospital has so much better results , they will share .
They will share the information on how to improve .
So it is , by measuring and creating transparency , you get a cycle of continuous improvement , which is what this slide shows .
Now , you may say this is a nice idea , but this isnt only an idea .
This is happening in reality .
Were creating a global community , and a large global community , where well be able to measure and compare what we achieve .
Together with two academic institutions , Michael Porter at Harvard Business School , and the Karolinska Institute in Sweden , BCG has formed something we call ICHOM .
You may think thats a sneeze , but its not a sneeze , its an acronym .
It stands for the International Consortium for Health Outcome Measurement .
Were bringing together leading physicians and patients to discuss , disease by disease , what is really quality , what should we measure , and to make those standards global .
Theyve worked  -  -  four working groups have worked during the past year : cataracts , back pain , coronary artery disease , which is , for instance , heart attack , and prostate cancer .
The four groups will publish their data in November of this year .
Thats the first time well be comparing apples to apples , not only within a country , but between countries .
Next year , were planning to do eight diseases , the year after , 16 .
In three years time , we plan to have covered 40 percent of the disease burden .
Compare apples to apples . Whos better ?
Why is that ?
Five months ago , I led a workshop at the largest university hospital in Northern Europe .
They have a new CEO , and she has a vision : I want to manage my big institution much more on quality , outcomes that matter to patients .
This particular day , we sat in a workshop together with physicians , nurses and other staff , discussing leukemia in children .
The group discussed , how do we measure quality today ?
Can we measure it better than we do ?
We discussed , how do we treat these kids , what are important improvements ?
And we discussed what are the costs for these patients , can we do treatment more efficiently ?
There was an enormous energy in the room .
There were so many ideas , so much enthusiasm .
At the end of the meeting , the chairman of the department , he stood up .
He looked over the group and he said  -  -  first he raised his hand , I forgot that  -  -  he raised his hand , clenched his fist , and then he said to the group ,  Thank you .
Thank you . Today , were finally discussing what this hospital does the right way . 
By measuring value in healthcare , that is not only costs but outcomes that matter to patients , we will make staff in hospitals and elsewhere in the healthcare system not a problem but an important part of the solution .
I believe measuring value in healthcare will bring about a revolution , and Im convinced that the founder of modern medicine , the Greek Hippocrates , who always put the patient at the center , he would smile in his grave .
Thank you .
Brian Cox : Why we need the explorers
In tough economic times , our exploratory science programs  -  -  from space probes to the LHC  -  -  are first to suffer budget cuts . Brian Cox explains how curiosity - driven science pays for itself , powering innovation and a profound appreciation of our existence .
We live in difficult and challenging economic times , of course .
And one of the first victims of difficult economic times , I think , is public spending of any kind , but certainly in the firing line at the moment is public spending for science , and particularly curiosity - led science and exploration .
So I want to try and convince you in about 15 minutes that thats a ridiculous and ludicrous thing to do .
But I think to set the scene , I want to show  -  -  the next slide is not my attempt to show the worst TED slide in the history of TED , but it is a bit of a mess .
But actually , its not my fault ; its from the Guardian newspaper .
And its actually a beautiful demonstration of how much science costs .
Because , if Im going to make the case for continuing to spend on curiosity - driven science and exploration , I should tell you how much it costs .
So this is a game called  spot the science budgets . 
This is the U.K . government spend .
You see there , its about 620 billion a year .
The science budget is actually  -  -  if you look to your left , theres a purple set of blobs and then yellow set of blobs .
And its one of the yellow set of blobs around the big yellow blob .
Its about 3.3 billion pounds per year out of 620 billion .
That funds everything in the U.K .
from medical research , space exploration , where I work , at CERN in Geneva , particle physics , engineering , even arts and humanities , funded from the science budget , which is that 3.3 billion , that little , tiny yellow blob around the orange blob at the top left of the screen .
So thats what were arguing about .
That percentage , by the way , is about the same in the U.S . and Germany and France .
R and D in total in the economy , publicly funded , is about 0.6 percent of GDP .
So thats what were arguing about .
The first thing I want to say , and this is straight from  Wonders of the Solar System ,  is that our exploration of the solar system and the universe has shown us that it is indescribably beautiful .
This is a picture that actually was sent back by the Cassini space probe around Saturn , after wed finished filming  Wonders of the Solar System . 
So it isnt in the series .
Its of the moon Enceladus .
So that big sweeping , white sphere in the corner is Saturn , which is actually in the background of the picture .
And that crescent there is the moon Enceladus , which is about as big as the British Isles .
Its about 500 kilometers in diameter .
So , tiny moon .
Whats fascinating and beautiful ...
this an unprocessed picture , by the way , I should say , its black and white , straight from Saturnian orbit .
Whats beautiful is , you can probably see on the limb there some faint , sort of , wisps of almost smoke rising up from the limb .
This is how we visualize that in  Wonders of the Solar System . 
Its a beautiful graphic .
What we found out were that those faint wisps are actually fountains of ice rising up from the surface of this tiny moon .
Thats fascinating and beautiful in itself , but we think that the mechanism for powering those fountains requires there to be lakes of liquid water beneath the surface of this moon .
And whats important about that is that , on our planet , on Earth , wherever we find liquid water , we find life .
So , to find strong evidence of liquid , pools of liquid , beneath the surface of a moon 750 million miles away from the Earth is really quite astounding .
So what were saying , essentially , is maybe thats a habitat for life in the solar system .
Well , let me just say , that was a graphic . I just want to show this picture .
Thats one more picture of Enceladus .
This is when Cassini flew beneath Enceladus .
So it made a very low pass , just a few hundred kilometers above the surface .
And so this , again , a real picture of the ice fountains rising up into space , absolutely beautiful .
But thats not the prime candidate for life in the solar system .
Thats probably this place , which is a moon of Jupiter , Europa .
And again , we had to fly to the Jovian system to get any sense that this moon , as most moons , was anything other than a dead ball of rock .
Its actually an ice moon .
So what youre looking at is the surface of the moon Europa , which is a thick sheet of ice , probably a hundred kilometers thick .
But by measuring the way that Europa interacts with the magnetic field of Jupiter , and looking at how those cracks in the ice that you can see there on that graphic move around , weve inferred very strongly that theres an ocean of liquid surrounding the entire surface of Europa .
So below the ice , theres an ocean of liquid around the whole moon .
It could be hundreds of kilometers deep , we think .
We think its saltwater , and that would mean that theres more water on that moon of Jupiter than there is in all the oceans of the Earth combined .
So that place , a little moon around Jupiter , is probably the prime candidate for finding life on a moon or a body outside the Earth , that we know of .
Tremendous and beautiful discovery .
Our exploration of the solar system has taught us that the solar system is beautiful .
It may also have pointed the way to answering one of the most profound questions that you can possibly ask , which is :  Are we alone in the universe ? 
Is there any other use to exploration and science , other than just a sense of wonder ?
Well , there is .
This is a very famous picture taken , actually , on my first Christmas Eve , December 24th , 1968 , when I was about eight months old .
It was taken by Apollo 8 as it went around the back of the moon .
Earthrise from Apollo 8 .
A famous picture ; many people have said that its the picture that saved 1968 , which was a turbulent year  -  -  the student riots in Paris , the height of the Vietnam War .
The reason many people think that about this picture , and Al Gore has said it many times , actually , on the stage at TED , is that this picture , arguably , was the beginning of the environmental movement .
Because , for the first time , we saw our world , not as a solid , immovable , kind of indestructible place , but as a very small , fragile - looking world just hanging against the blackness of space .
Whats also not often said about the space exploration , about the Apollo program , is the economic contribution it made .
I mean while you can make arguments that it was wonderful and a tremendous achievement and delivered pictures like this , it cost a lot , didnt it ?
Well , actually , many studies have been done about the economic effectiveness , the economic impact of Apollo .
The biggest one was in 1975 by Chase Econometrics .
And it showed that for every $ 1 spent on Apollo , 14 came back into the U.S . economy .
So the Apollo program paid for itself in inspiration , in engineering , achievement and , I think , in inspiring young scientists and engineers 14 times over .
So exploration can pay for itself .
What about scientific discovery ?
What about driving innovation ?
Well , this looks like a picture of virtually nothing .
What it is , is a picture of the spectrum of hydrogen .
See , back in the 1880s , 1890s , many scientists , many observers , looked at the light given off from atoms .
And they saw strange pictures like this .
What youre seeing when you put it through a prism is that you heat hydrogen up and it doesnt just glow like a white light , it just emits light at particular colors , a red one , a light blue one , some dark blue ones .
Now that led to an understanding of atomic structure because the way thats explained is atoms are a single nucleus with electrons going around them .
And the electrons can only be in particular places .
And when they jump up to the next place they can be , and fall back down again , they emit light at particular colors .
And so the fact that atoms , when you heat them up , only emit light at very specific colors , was one of the key drivers that led to the development of the quantum theory , the theory of the structure of atoms .
I just wanted to show this picture because this is remarkable .
This is actually a picture of the spectrum of the Sun .
And now , this is a picture of atoms in the Suns atmosphere absorbing light .
And again , they only absorb light at particular colors when electrons jump up and fall down , jump up and fall down .
But look at the number of black lines in that spectrum .
And the element helium was discovered just by staring at the light from the Sun because some of those black lines were found that corresponded to no known element .
And thats why heliums called helium .
Its called  helios   -  -  helios from the Sun .
Now , that sounds esoteric , and indeed it was an esoteric pursuit , but the quantum theory quickly led to an understanding of the behaviors of electrons in materials like silicon , for example .
The way that silicon behaves , the fact that you can build transistors , is a purely quantum phenomenon .
So without that curiosity - driven understanding of the structure of atoms , which led to this rather esoteric theory , quantum mechanics , then we wouldnt have transistors , we wouldnt have silicon chips , we wouldnt have pretty much the basis of our modern economy .
Theres one more , I think , wonderful twist to that tale .
In  Wonders of the Solar System ,  we kept emphasizing the laws of physics are universal .
Its one of the most incredible things about the physics and the understanding of nature that you get on Earth , is you can transport it , not only to the planets , but to the most distant stars and galaxies .
And one of the astonishing predictions of quantum mechanics , just by looking at the structure of atoms  -  -  the same theory that describes transistors  -  -  is that there can be no stars in the universe that have reached the end of their life that are bigger than , quite specifically , 1.4 times the mass of the Sun .
Thats a limit imposed on the mass of stars .
You can work it out on a piece of paper in a laboratory , get a telescope , swing it to the sky , and you find that there are no dead stars bigger than 1.4 times the mass of the Sun .
Thats quite an incredible prediction .
What happens when you have a star thats right on the edge of that mass ?
Well , this is a picture of it .
This is the picture of a galaxy , a common  our garden  galaxy with , what , 100 billion stars like our Sun in it .
Its just one of billions of galaxies in the universe .
There are a billion stars in the galactic core , which is why its shining out so brightly .
This is about 50 million light years away , so one of our neighboring galaxies .
But that bright star there is actually one of the stars in the galaxy .
So that star is also 50 million light years away .
Its part of that galaxy , and its shining as brightly as the center of the galaxy with a billion suns in it .
Thats a Type Ia supernova explosion .
Now thats an incredible phenomena , because its a star that sits there .
Its called a carbon - oxygen dwarf .
It sits there about , say , 1.3 times the mass of the Sun .
And it has a binary companion that goes around it , so a big star , a big ball of gas .
And what it does is it sucks gas off its companion star , until it gets to this limit called the Chandrasekhar limit , and then it explodes .
And it explodes , and it shines as brightly as a billion suns for about two weeks , and releases , not only energy , but a huge amount of chemical elements into the universe .
In fact , that one is a carbon - oxygen dwarf .
Now , there was no carbon and oxygen in the universe at the Big Bang .
And there was no carbon and oxygen in the universe throughout the first generation of stars .
It was made in stars like that , locked away and then returned to the universe in explosions like that in order to recondense into planets , stars , new solar systems and , indeed , people like us .
I think thats a remarkable demonstration of the power and beauty and universality of the laws of physics , because we understand that process , because we understand the structure of atoms here on Earth .
This is a beautiful quote that I found  -  -  were talking about serendipity there  -  -  from Alexander Fleming :  When I woke up just after dawn on September 28 , 1928 , I certainly didnt plan to revolutionize all medicine by discovering the worlds first antibiotic . 
Now , the explorers of the world of the atom did not intend to invent the transistor .
And they certainly didnt intend to describe the mechanics of supernova explosions , which eventually told us where the building blocks of life were synthesized in the universe .
So , I think science can be  -  -  serendipity is important .
It can be beautiful . It can reveal quite astonishing things .
It can also , I think , finally reveal the most profound ideas to us about our place in the universe and really the value of our home planet .
This is a spectacular picture of our home planet .
Now , it doesnt look like our home planet .
It looks like Saturn because , of course , it is .
It was taken by the Cassini space probe .
But its a famous picture , not because of the beauty and majesty of Saturns rings , but actually because of a tiny , faint blob just hanging underneath one of the rings .
And if I blow it up there , you see it .
It looks like a moon , but in fact , its a picture of Earth .
It was a picture of Earth captured in that frame of Saturn .
Thats our planet from 750 million miles away .
I think the Earth has got a strange property that the farther away you get from it , the more beautiful it seems .
But that is not the most distant or most famous picture of our planet .
It was taken by this thing , which is called the Voyager spacecraft .
And thats a picture of me in front of it for scale .
The Voyager is a tiny machine .
Its currently 10 billion miles away from Earth , transmitting with that dish , with the power of 20 watts , and were still in contact with it .
But it visited Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus and Neptune .
And after it visited all four of those planets , Carl Sagan , whos one of my great heroes , had the wonderful idea of turning Voyager around and taking a picture of every planet it had visited .
And it took this picture of Earth .
Now its very hard to see the Earth there , its called the  Pale Blue Dot  picture , but Earth is suspended in that red shaft of light .
Thats Earth from four billion miles away .
And Id like to read you what Sagan wrote about it , just to finish , because I can not say words as beautiful as this to describe what he saw in that picture that he had taken .
He said ,  Consider again that dot .
Thats here . Thats home . Thats us .
On it , everyone you love , everyone you know , everyone youve ever heard of , every human being who ever was lived out their lives .
The aggregates of joy and suffering thousands of confident religions , ideologies and economic doctrines , every hunter and forager , every hero and coward , every creator and destroyer of civilization , every king and peasant , every young couple in love , every mother and father , hopeful child , inventor and explorer , every teacher of morals , every corrupt politician , every superstar , every supreme leader , every saint and sinner in the history of our species , lived there , on a mote of dust , suspended in a sunbeam .
Its been said that astronomys a humbling and character - building experience .
There is perhaps no better demonstration of the folly of human conceits than this distant image of our tiny world .
To me , it underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot , the only home weve ever known . 
Beautiful words about the power of science and exploration .
The argument has always been made , and it will always be made , that we know enough about the universe .
You could have made it in the 1920s ; you wouldnt have had penicillin .
You could have made it in the 1890s ; you wouldnt have the transistor .
And its made today in these difficult economic times .
Surely , we know enough .
We dont need to discover anything else about our universe .
Let me leave the last words to someone whos rapidly becoming a hero of mine , Humphrey Davy , who did his science at the turn of the 19th century .
He was clearly under assault all the time .
 We know enough at the turn of the 19th century .
Just exploit it ; just build things . 
He said this , he said ,  Nothing is more fatal to the progress of the human mind than to presume that our views of science are ultimate , that our triumphs are complete , that there are no mysteries in nature , and that there are no new worlds to conquer . 
Thank you .
Janna Levin : The sound the universe makes
We think of space as a silent place . But physicist Janna Levin says the universe has a soundtrack  -  -  a sonic composition that records some of the most dramatic events in outer space . An accessible and mind - expanding soundwalk through the universe .
I want to ask you all to consider for a second the very simple fact that , by far , most of what we know about the universe comes to us from light .
We can stand on the Earth and look up at the night sky and see stars with our bare eyes .
The Sun burns our peripheral vision .
We see light reflected off the Moon .
And in the time since Galileo pointed that rudimentary telescope at the celestial bodies , the known universe has come to us through light , across vast eras in cosmic history .
And with all of our modern telescopes , weve been able to collect this stunning silent movie of the universe  -  -  these series of snapshots that go all the way back to the Big Bang .
And yet , the universe is not a silent movie because the universe isnt silent .
Id like to convince you that the universe has a soundtrack and that soundtrack is played on space itself , because space can wobble like a drum .
It can ring out a kind of recording throughout the universe of some of the most dramatic events as they unfold .
Now wed like to be able to add to a kind of glorious visual composition that we have of the universe  -  -  a sonic composition .
And while weve never heard the sounds from space , we really should , in the next few years , start to turn up the volume on whats going on out there .
So in this ambition to capture songs from the universe , we turn our focus to black holes and the promise they have , because black holes can bang on space - time like mallets on a drum and have a very characteristic song , which Id like to play for you  -  -  some of our predictions for what that song will be like .
Now black holes are dark against a dark sky .
We cant see them directly .
Theyre not brought to us with light , at least not directly .
We can see them indirectly , because black holes wreak havoc on their environment .
They destroy stars around them .
They churn up debris in their surroundings .
But they wont come to us directly through light .
We might one day see a shadow a black hole can cast on a very bright background , but we havent yet .
And yet black holes may be heard even if theyre not seen , and thats because they bang on space - time like a drum .
Now we owe the idea that space can ring like a drum to Albert Einstein  -  -  to whom we owe so much .
Einstein realized that if space were empty , if the universe were empty , it would be like this picture , except for maybe without the helpful grid drawn on it .
But if we were freely falling through the space , even without this helpful grid , we might be able to paint it ourselves , because we would notice that we traveled along straight lines , undeflected straight paths through the universe .
Einstein also realized  -  -  and this is the real meat of the matter  -  -  that if you put energy or mass in the universe , it would curve space , and a freely falling object would pass by , lets say , the Sun and it would be deflected along the natural curves in the space .
It was Einsteins great general theory of relativity .
Now even light will be bent by those paths .
And you can be bent so much that youre caught in orbit around the Sun , as the Earth is , or the Moon around the Earth .
These are the natural curves in space .
What Einstein did not realize was that , if you took our Sun and you crushed it down to six kilometers  -  -  so you took a million times the mass of the Earth and you crushed it to six kilometers across , you would make a black hole , an object so dense that if light veered too close , it would never escape  -  -  a dark shadow against the universe .
It wasnt Einstein who realized this , it was Karl Schwarzschild who was a German Jew in World War I  -  -  joined the German army already an accomplished scientist , working on the Russian front .
I like to imagine Schwarzschild in the war in the trenches calculating ballistic trajectories for cannon fire , and then , in between , calculating Einsteins equations  -  -  as you do in the trenches .
And he was reading Einsteins recently published general theory of relativity , and he was thrilled by this theory .
And he quickly surmised an exact mathematical solution that described something very extraordinary : curves so strong that space would rain down into them , space itself would curve like a waterfall flowing down the throat of a hole .
And even light could not escape this current .
Light would be dragged down the hole as everything else would be , and all that would be left would be a shadow .
Now he wrote to Einstein , and he said ,  As you will see , the war has been kind to me enough .
Despite the heavy gunfire , Ive been able to get away from it all and walk through the land of your ideas . 
And Einstein was very impressed with his exact solution , and I should hope also the dedication of the scientist .
This is the hardworking scientist under harsh conditions .
And he took Schwarzschilds idea to the Prussian Academy of Sciences the next week .
But Einstein always thought black holes were a mathematical oddity .
He did not believe they existed in nature .
He thought nature would protect us from their formation .
It was decades before the term  black hole  was coined and people realized that black holes are real astrophysical objects  -  -  in fact theyre the death state of very massive stars that collapse catastrophically at the end of their lifetime .
Now our Sun will not collapse to a black hole .
Its actually not massive enough .
But if we did a little thought experiment  -  -  as Einstein was very fond of doing  -  -  we could imagine putting the Sun crushed down to six kilometers , and putting a tiny little Earth around it in orbit , maybe 30 kilometers outside of the black - hole sun .
And it would be self - illuminated , because now the Suns gone , we have no other source of light  -  -  so lets make our little Earth self - illuminated .
And you would realize you could put the Earth in a happy orbit even 30 km outside of this crushed black hole .
This crushed black hole actually would fit inside Manhattan , more or less .
It might spill off into the Hudson a little bit before it destroyed the Earth .
But basically thats what were talking about .
Were talking about an object that you could crush down to half the square area of Manhattan .
So we move this Earth very close  -  -  30 kilometers outside  -  -  and we notice its perfectly fine orbiting around the black hole .
Theres a sort of myth that black holes devour everything in the universe , but you actually have to get very close to fall in .
But whats very impressive is that , from our vantage point , we can always see the Earth .
It can not hide behind the black hole .
The light from the Earth , some of it falls in , but some of it gets lensed around and brought back to us .
So you cant hide anything behind a black hole .
If this were Battlestar Galactica and youre fighting the Cylons , dont hide behind the black hole .
They can see you .
Now , our Sun will not collapse to a black hole  -  -  its not massive enough  -  -  but there are tens of thousands of black holes in our galaxy .
And if one were to eclipse the Milky Way , this is what it would look like .
We would see a shadow of that black hole against the hundred billion stars in the Milky Way Galaxy and its luminous dust lanes .
And if we were to fall towards this black hole , we would see all of that light lensed around it , and we could even start to cross into that shadow and really not notice that anything dramatic had happened .
It would be bad if we tried to fire our rockets and get out of there because we couldnt , anymore than light can escape .
But even though the black hole is dark from the outside , its not dark on the inside , because all of the light from the galaxy can fall in behind us .
And even though , due to a relativistic effect known as time dilation , our clocks would seem to slow down relative to galactic time , it would look as though the evolution of the galaxy had been sped up and shot at us , right before we were crushed to death by the black hole .
It would be like a near - death experience where you see the light at the end of the tunnel , but its a total death experience .
And theres no way of telling anybody about the light at the end of the tunnel .
Now weve never seen a shadow like this of a black hole , but black holes can be heard , even if theyre not seen .
Imagine now taking an astrophysically realistic situation  -  -  imagine two black holes that have lived a long life together .
Maybe they started as stars and collapsed to two black holes  -  -  each one 10 times the mass of the Sun .
So now were going to crush them down to 60 kilometers across .
They can be spinning hundreds of times a second .
At the end of their lives , theyre going around each other very near the speed of light .
So theyre crossing thousands of kilometers in a fraction of a second , and as they do so , they not only curve space , but they leave behind in their wake a ringing of space , an actual wave on space - time .
Space squeezes and stretches as it emanates out from these black holes banging on the universe .
And they travel out into the cosmos at the speed of light .
This computer simulation is due to a relativity group at NASA Goddard .
It took almost 30 years for anyone in the world to crack this problem .
This was one of the groups .
It shows two black holes in orbit around each other , again , with these helpfully painted curves .
And if you can see  -  -  its kind of faint  -  -  but if you can see the red waves emanating out , those are the gravitational waves .
Theyre literally the sounds of space ringing , and they will travel out from these black holes at the speed of light as they ring down and coalesce to one spinning , quiet black hole at the end of the day .
If you were standing near enough , your ear would resonate with the squeezing and stretching of space .
You would literally hear the sound .
Now of course , your head would be squeezed and stretched unhelpfully , so you might have trouble understanding whats going on .
But Id like to play for you the sound that we predict .
This is from my group  -  -  a slightly less glamorous computer modeling .
Imagine a lighter black hole falling into a very heavy black hole .
The sound youre hearing is the light black hole banging on space each time it gets close .
If it gets far away , its a little too quiet .
But it comes in like a mallet , and it literally cracks space , wobbling it like a drum .
And we can predict what the sound will be .
We know that , as it falls in , it gets faster and it gets louder .
And eventually , were going to hear the little guy just fall into the bigger guy .
Then its gone .
Now Ive never heard it that loud  -  -  its actually more dramatic .
At home it sounds kind of anticlimactic .
Its sort of like ding , ding , ding .
This is another sound from my group .
No , Im not showing you any images , because black holes dont leave behind helpful trails of ink , and space is not painted , showing you the curves .
But if you were to float by in space on a space holiday and you heard this , you want to get moving .
Want to get away from the sound .
Both black holes are moving .
Both black holes are getting closer together .
In this case , theyre both wobbling quite a lot .
And then theyre going to merge .
Now its gone .
Now that chirp is very characteristic of black holes merging  -  -  that it chirps up at the end .
Now thats our prediction for what well see .
Luckily were at this safe distance in Long Beach , California .
And surely , somewhere in the universe two black holes have merged .
And surely , the space around us is ringing after traveling maybe a million light years , or a million years , at the speed of light to get to us .
But the sound is too quiet for any of us to ever hear .
There are very industrious experiments being built on Earth  -  -  one called LIGO  -  -  which will detect deviations in the squeezing and stretching of space at less than the fraction of a nucleus of an atom over four kilometers .
Its a remarkably ambitious experiment , and its going to be at advanced sensitivity within the next few years  -  -  to pick this up .
Theres also a mission proposed for space , which hopefully will launch in the next ten years , called LISA .
And LISA will be able to see super - massive black holes  -  -  black holes millions or billions of times the mass of the Sun .
In this Hubble image , we see two galaxies .
They look like theyre frozen in some embrace .
And each one probably harbors a super - massive black hole at its core .
But theyre not frozen ; theyre actually merging .
These two black holes are colliding , and they will merge over a billion - year time scale .
Its beyond our human perception to pick up a song of that duration .
But LISA could see the final stages of two super - massive black holes earlier in the universes history , the last 15 minutes before they fall together .
And its not just black holes , but its also any big disturbance in the universe  -  -  and the biggest of them all is the Big Bang .
When that expression was coined , it was derisive  -  -  like ,  Oh , who would believe in a Big Bang ? 
But now it actually might be more technically accurate because it might bang .
It might make a sound .
This animation from my friends at Proton Studios shows looking at the Big Bang from the outside .
We dont ever want to do that actually . We want to be inside the universe because theres no such thing as standing outside the universe .
So imagine youre inside the Big Bang .
Its everywhere , its all around you , and the space is wobbling chaotically .
Fourteen billion years pass and this song is still ringing all around us .
Galaxies form , and generations of stars form in those galaxies , and around one star , at least one star , is a habitable planet .
And here we are frantically building these experiments , doing these calculations , writing these computer codes .
Imagine a billion years ago , two black holes collided .
That song has been ringing through space for all that time .
We werent even here .
It gets closer and closer  -  -  40,000 years ago , were still doing cave paintings .
Its like hurry , build your instruments .
Its getting closer and closer , and in 20 ...
whatever year it will be when our detectors are finally at advanced sensitivity  -  -  well build them , well turn on the machines and , bang , well catch it  -  -  the first song from space .
If it was the Big Bang we were going to pick up , it would sound like this .
Its a terrible sound .
Its literally the definition of noise .
Its white noise ; its such a chaotic ringing .
But its around us everywhere , presumably , if it hasnt been wiped out by some other process in the universe .
And if we pick it up , it will be music to our ears because it will be the quiet echo of that moment of our creation , of our observable universe .
So within the next few years , well be able to turn up the soundtrack a little bit , render the universe in audio .
But if we detect those earliest moments , itll bring us that much closer to an understanding of the Big Bang , which brings us that much closer to asking some of the hardest , most elusive , questions .
If we run the movie of our universe backwards , we know that there was a Big Bang in our past , and we might even hear the cacophonous sound of it , but was our Big Bang the only Big Bang ?
I mean we have to ask , has it happened before ?
Will it happen again ?
I mean , in the spirit of rising to TEDs challenge to reignite wonder , we can ask questions , at least for this last minute , that honestly might evade us forever .
But we have to ask : Is it possible that our universe is just a plume off of some greater history ?
Or , is it possible that were just a branch off of a multiverse  -  -  each branch with its own Big Bang in its past  -  -  maybe some of them with black holes playing drums , maybe some without  -  -  maybe some with sentient life , and maybe some without  -  -  not in our past , not in our future , but somehow fundamentally connected to us ?
So we have to wonder , if there is a multiverse , in some other patch of that multiverse , are there creatures ?
Heres my multiverse creatures .
Are there other creatures in the multiverse , wondering about us and wondering about their own origins ?
And if they are , I can imagine them as we are , calculating , writing computer code , building instruments , trying to detect that faintest sound of their origins and wondering who else is out there .
Thank you . Thank you .
Joe Kowan : How I beat stage fright
Humanitys fine - tuned sense of fear served us well as a young species , giving us laser focus to avoid being eaten by competing beasts . But its less wonderful when that same visceral , body - hijacking sense of fear kicks in in front of 20 folk - music fans at a Tuesday night open - mic . Palms sweat , hands shake , vision blurs , and the brain says RUN : its stage fright . In this charming , tuneful little talk , Joe Kowan talks about how he conquered it .
Joe Kowan : I have stage fright .
Ive always had stage fright , and not just a little bit , its a big bit .
And it didnt even matter until I was 27 .
Thats when I started writing songs , and even then I only played them for myself .
Just knowing my roommates were in the same house made me uncomfortable .
But after a couple of years , just writing songs wasnt enough .
I had all these stories and ideas , and I wanted to share them with people , but physiologically , I couldnt do it .
I had this irrational fear .
But the more I wrote , and the more I practiced , the more I wanted to perform .
So on the week of my 30th birthday , I decided I was going to go to this local open mic , and put this fear behind me .
Well , when I got there , it was packed .
There were like 20 people there .
And they all looked angry .
But I took a deep breath , and I signed up to play , and I felt pretty good .
Pretty good , until about 10 minutes before my turn , when my whole body rebelled , and this wave of anxiety just washed over me .
Now , when you experience fear , your sympathetic nervous system kicks in .
So you have a rush of adrenaline , your heart rate increases , your breathing gets faster .
Next your non - essential systems start to shut down , like digestion .
So your mouth gets dry , and blood is routed away from your extremities , so your fingers dont work anymore .
Your pupils dilate , your muscles contract , your Spidey sense tingles , basically your whole body is trigger - happy .
That condition is not conducive to performing folk music .
I mean , your nervous system is an idiot .
Really ? Two hundred thousand years of human evolution , and it still cant tell the difference between a saber tooth tiger and 20 folksingers on a Tuesday night open mic ?
I have never been more terrified  -  -  until now .
So then it was my turn , and somehow , I get myself onto the stage , I start my song , I open my mouth to sing the first line , and this completely horrible vibrato  -  -  you know , when your voice wavers  -  -  comes streaming out .
And this is not the good kind of vibrato , like an opera singer has , this is my whole body just convulsing with fear .
I mean , its a nightmare .
Im embarrassed , the audience is clearly uncomfortable , theyre focused on my discomfort .
It was so bad .
But that was my first real experience as a solo singer - songwriter .
And something good did happen  -  -  I had the tiniest little glimpse of that audience connection that I was hoping for .
And I wanted more . But I knew I had to get past this nervousness .
That night I promised myself : I would go back every week until I wasnt nervous anymore .
And I did . I went back every single week , and sure enough , week after week , it didnt get any better . The same thing happened every week .
I couldnt shake it .
And thats when I had an epiphany .
And I remember it really well , because I dont have a lot of epiphanies .
All I had to do was write a song that exploits my nervousness .
That only seems authentic when I have stage fright , and the more nervous I was , the better the song would be . Easy .
So I started writing a song about having stage fright .
First , fessing up to the problem , the physical manifestations , how I would feel , how the listener might feel .
And then accounting for things like my shaky voice , and I knew I would be singing about a half - octave higher than normal , because I was nervous .
By having a song that explained what was happening to me , while it was happening , that gave the audience permission to think about it .
They didnt have to feel bad for me because I was nervous , they could experience that with me , and we were all one big happy , nervous , uncomfortable family .
By thinking about my audience , by embracing and exploiting my problem , I was able to take something that was blocking my progress , and turn it into something that was essential for my success .
And having the stage fright song let me get past that biggest issue right in the beginning of a performance .
And then I could move on , and play the rest of my songs with just a little bit more ease .
And eventually , over time , I didnt have to play the stage fright song at all .
Except for when I was really nervous , like now .
Would it be okay if I played the stage fright song for you ?
Can I have a sip of water ?
Thank you .
Im not joking , you know , this stage fright is real . And if Im up here trembling and singing , well , youll know how I feel . And the mistake Id be making , the tremolo caused by my whole body shaking . As you sit there feeling embarrassed for me , well , you dont have to be . Well , maybe just a little bit . And maybe Ill try to imagine you all without clothes . But singing in front of all naked strangers scares me more than anyone knows . Not to discuss this at length , but my body image was never my strength . So frankly , I wish that you all would get dressed , I mean , youre not even really naked . And Im the one with the problem . And you tell me , dont worry so much , youll be great . But Im the one living with me and I know how I get . Your advice is gentle but late . If not just a bit patronizing . And that sarcastic tone doesnt help me when I sing . But we shouldnt talk about these things right now , really , Im up on stage , and youre in the crowd . Hi . And Im not making fun of unnurtured , irrrational fear , and if I wasnt ready to face this , I sure as hell wouldnt be here . But if I belt one note out clearly , youll know Im recovering slowly but surely . And maybe next week , Ill set my guitar ringin my voice clear as water , and everyone singin . But probably Ill just get up and start groovin , my vocal cords movin , at speeds slightly faster than sound .
Alan Kay : A powerful idea about ideas
With all the intensity and brilliance for which he is known , Alan Kay envisions better techniques for teaching kids by using computers to illustrate experience in ways  -  – mathematically and scientifically  -  -  that only computers can .
A great way to start , I think , with my view of simplicity is to take a look at TED . Here you are , understanding why were here , whats going on with no difficulty at all .
The best A.I . in the planet would find it complex and confusing , and my little dog Watson would find it simple and understandable but would miss the point .
He would have a great time .
And of course , if youre a speaker here , like Hans Rosling , a speaker finds this complex , tricky . But in Hans Roslings case , he had a secret weapon yesterday , literally , in his sword swallowing act .
And I must say , I thought of quite a few objects that I might try to swallow today and finally gave up on , but he just did it and that was a wonderful thing .
So Puck meant not only are we fools in the pejorative sense , but that were easily fooled . In fact , what Shakespeare was pointing out is we go to the theater in order to be fooled , so were actually looking forward to it .
We go to magic shows in order to be fooled .
And this makes many things fun , but it makes it difficult to actually get any kind of picture on the world we live in or on ourselves .
And our friend , Betty Edwards , the  Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain  lady , shows these two tables to her drawing class and says ,  The problem you have with learning to draw is not that you cant move your hand , but that the way your brain perceives images is faulty .
Its trying to perceive images into objects rather than seeing whats there . 
And to prove it , she says ,  The exact size and shape of these tabletops is the same , and Im going to prove it to you . 
She does this with cardboard , but since I have an expensive computer here Ill just rotate this little guy around and ...
Now having seen that  -  -  and Ive seen it hundreds of times , because I use this in every talk I give  -  -  I still cant see that theyre the same size and shape , and I doubt that you can either .
So what do artists do ? Well , what artists do is to measure .
They measure very , very carefully .
And if you measure very , very carefully with a stiff arm and a straight edge , youll see that those two shapes are exactly the same size .
And the Talmud saw this a long time ago , saying ,  We see things not as they are , but as we are . 
I certainly would like to know what happened to the person who had that insight back then , if they actually followed it to its ultimate conclusion .
So if the world is not as it seems and we see things as we are , then what we call reality is a kind of hallucination happening inside here . Its a waking dream , and understanding that that is what we actually exist in is one of the biggest epistemological barriers in human history .
And what that means :  simple and understandable  might not be actually simple or understandable , and things we think are  complex  might be made simple and understandable .
Somehow we have to understand ourselves to get around our flaws .
We can think of ourselves as kind of a noisy channel .
The way I think of it is , we cant learn to see until we admit were blind .
Once you start down at this very humble level , then you can start finding ways to see things .
And whats happened , over the last 400 years in particular , is that human beings have invented  brainlets   -  -  little additional parts for our brain  -  -  made out of powerful ideas that help us see the world in different ways .
And these are in the form of sensory apparatus  -  -  telescopes , microscopes  -  -  reasoning apparatus  -  -  various ways of thinking  -  -  and , most importantly , in the ability to change perspective on things .
Ill talk about that a little bit .
Its this change in perspective on what it is we think were perceiving that has helped us make more progress in the last 400 years than we have in the rest of human history .
And yet , it is not taught in any K through 12 curriculum in America that Im aware of .
So one of the things that goes from simple to complex is when we do more . We like more .
If we do more in a kind of a stupid way , the simplicity gets complex and , in fact , we can keep on doing it for a very long time .
But Murray Gell - Mann yesterday talked about emergent properties ; another name for them could be  architecture  as a metaphor for taking the same old material and thinking about non - obvious , non - simple ways of combining it .
And in fact , what Murray was talking about yesterday in the fractal beauty of nature  -  -  of having the descriptions at various levels be rather similar  -  -  all goes down to the idea that the elementary particles are both sticky and standoffish , and theyre in violent motion .
Those three things give rise to all the different levels of what seem to be complexity in our world .
But how simple ?
So , when I saw Roslings Gapminder stuff a few years ago , I just thought it was the greatest thing Id seen in conveying complex ideas simply .
But then I had a thought of ,  Boy , maybe its too simple . 
And I put some effort in to try and check to see how well these simple portrayals of trends over time actually matched up with some ideas and investigations from the side , and I found that they matched up very well .
So the Roslings have been able to do simplicity without removing whats important about the data .
Whereas the film yesterday that we saw of the simulation of the inside of a cell , as a former molecular biologist , I didnt like that at all .
Not because it wasnt beautiful or anything , but because it misses the thing that most students fail to understand about molecular biology , and that is : why is there any probability at all of two complex shapes finding each other just the right way so they combine together and be catalyzed ?
And what we saw yesterday was every reaction was fortuitous ; they just swooped in the air and bound , and something happened .
But in fact , those molecules are spinning at the rate of about a million revolutions per second ; theyre agitating back and forth their size every two nanoseconds ; theyre completely crowded together , theyre jammed , theyre bashing up against each other .
And if you dont understand that in your mental model of this stuff , what happens inside of a cell seems completely mysterious and fortuitous , and I think thats exactly the wrong image for when youre trying to teach science .
So , another thing that we do is to confuse adult sophistication with the actual understanding of some principle .
So a kid whos 14 in high school gets this version of the Pythagorean theorem , which is a truly subtle and interesting proof , but in fact its not a good way to start learning about mathematics .
So a more direct one , one that gives you more of the feeling of math , is something closer to Pythagoras own proof , which goes like this : so here we have this triangle , and if we surround that C square with three more triangles and we copy that , notice that we can move those triangles down like this .
And that leaves two open areas that are kind of suspicious ...
and bingo . That is all you have to do .
And this kind of proof is the kind of proof that you need to learn when youre learning mathematics in order to get an idea of what it means before you look into the , literally , 1,200 or 1,500 proofs of Pythagoras theorem that have been discovered .
Now lets go to young children .
This is a very unusual teacher who was a kindergarten and first - grade teacher , but was a natural mathematician .
So she was like that jazz musician friend you have who never studied music but is a terrific musician ; she just had a feeling for math .
And here are her six - year - olds , and shes got them making shapes out of a shape .
So they pick a shape they like  -  -  like a diamond , or a square , or a triangle , or a trapezoid  -  -  and then they try and make the next larger shape of that same shape , and the next larger shape .
You can see the trapezoids are a little challenging there .
And what this teacher did on every project was to have the children act like first it was a creative arts project , and then something like science .
So they had created these artifacts .
Now she had them look at them and do this ... laborious , which I thought for a long time , until she explained to me was to slow them down so theyll think .
So theyre cutting out the little pieces of cardboard here and pasting them up .
But the whole point of this thing is for them to look at this chart and fill it out .
 What have you noticed about what you did ? 
And so six - year - old Lauren there noticed that the first one took one , and the second one took three more and the total was four on that one , the third one took five more and the total was nine on that one , and then the next one .
She saw right away that the additional tiles that you had to add around the edges was always going to grow by two , so she was very confident about how she made those numbers there .
And she could see that these were the square numbers up until about six , where she wasnt sure what six times six was and what seven times seven was , but then she was confident again .
So thats what Lauren did .
And then the teacher , Gillian Ishijima , had the kids bring all of their projects up to the front of the room and put them on the floor , and everybody went batshit :  Holy shit ! Theyre the same ! 
No matter what the shapes were , the growth law is the same .
And the mathematicians and scientists in the crowd will recognize these two progressions as a first - order discrete differential equation and a second - order discrete differential equation , derived by six - year - olds .
Well , thats pretty amazing .
That isnt what we usually try to teach six - year - olds .
So , lets take a look now at how we might use the computer for some of this .
And so the first idea here is just to show you the kind of things that children do .
Im using the software that were putting on the $ 100 laptop .
So Id like to draw a little car here  -  -  Ill just do this very quickly  -  -  and put a big tire on him .
And I get a little object here and I can look inside this object , Ill call it a car . And heres a little behavior : car forward .
Each time I click it , car turn .
If I want to make a little script to do this over and over again , I just drag these guys out and set them going .
And I can try steering the car here by ...
See the car turn by five here ?
So what if I click this down to zero ?
It goes straight . Thats a big revelation for nine - year - olds .
Make it go in the other direction .
But of course , thats a little bit like kissing your sister as far as driving a car , so the kids want to do a steering wheel ; so they draw a steering wheel .
And well call this a wheel .
See this wheels heading here ?
If I turn this wheel , you can see that number over there going minus and positive .
Thats kind of an invitation to pick up this name of those numbers coming out there and to just drop it into the script here , and now I can steer the car with the steering wheel .
And its interesting .
You know how much trouble the children have with variables , but by learning it this way , in a situated fashion , they never forget from this single trial what a variable is and how to use it .
And we can reflect here the way Gillian Ishijima did .
So if you look at the little script here , the speed is always going to be 30 .
Were going to move the car according to that over and over again .
And Im dropping a little dot for each one of these things ; theyre evenly spaced because theyre 30 apart .
And what if I do this progression that the six - year - olds did of saying ,  OK , Im going to increase the speed by two each time , and then Im going to increase the distance by the speed each time ?
What do I get there ? 
We get a visual pattern of what these nine - year - olds called acceleration .
So how do the children do science ?
Teacher :  Choose  objects that you think will fall to the Earth at the same time .
Student 1 : Ooh , this is nice .
Teacher : Do not pay any attention to what anybody else is doing .
Whos got the apple ?
Alan Kay : Theyve got little stopwatches .
Student 2 : What did you get ? What did you get ?
AK : Stopwatches arent accurate enough .
Student 3 : 0.99 seconds .
Teacher : So put  sponge ball  ...
Student 4l :  I decided to  do the shot put and the sponge ball because theyre two totally different weights , and if you drop them at the same time , maybe theyll drop at the same speed .
Teacher : Drop . Class : Whoa !
AK : So obviously , Aristotle never asked a child about this particular point because , of course , he didnt bother doing the experiment , and neither did St . Thomas Aquinas .
And it was not until Galileo actually did it that an adult thought like a child , only 400 years ago .
We get one child like that about every classroom of 30 kids who will actually cut straight to the chase .
Now , what if we want to look at this more closely ?
We can take a movie of whats going on , but even if we single stepped this movie , its tricky to see whats going on .
And so what we can do is we can lay out the frames side by side or stack them up .
So when the children see this , they say ,  Ah ! Acceleration ,  remembering back four months when they did their cars sideways , and they start measuring to find out what kind of acceleration it is .
So what Im doing is measuring from the bottom of one image to the bottom of the next image , about a fifth of a second later , like that . And theyre getting faster and faster each time , and if I stack these guys up , then we see the differences ; the increase in the speed is constant .
And they say ,  Oh , yeah . Constant acceleration .
Weve done that already . 
And how shall we look and verify that we actually have it ?
So you cant tell much from just making the ball drop there , but if we drop the ball and run the movie at the same time , we can see that we have come up with an accurate physical model .
Galileo , by the way , did this very cleverly by running a ball backwards down the strings of his lute .
I pulled out those apples to remind myself to tell you that this is actually probably a Newton and the apple type story , but its a great story .
And I thought I would do just one thing on the $ 100 laptop here just to prove that this stuff works here .
So once you have gravity , heres this  -  -  increase the speed by something , increase the ships speed .
If I start the little game here that the kids have done , itll crash the space ship .
But if I oppose gravity , here we go ... Oops !
One more .
I guess the best way to end this is with two quotes : Marshall McLuhan said ,  Children are the messages that we send to the future ,  but in fact , if you think of it , children are the future we send to the future .
Forget about messages ; children are the future , and children in the first and second world and , most especially , in the third world need mentors .
And this summer , were going to build five million of these $ 100 laptops , and maybe 50 million next year .
But we couldnt create 1,000 new teachers this summer to save our life .
That means that we , once again , have a thing where we can put technology out , but the mentoring that is required to go from a simple new iChat instant messaging system to something with depth is missing .
I believe this has to be done with a new kind of user interface , and this new kind of user interface could be done with an expenditure of about 100 million dollars .
It sounds like a lot , but it is literally 18 minutes of what were spending in Iraq  -  -  were spending 8 billion dollars a month ; 18 minutes is 100 million dollars  -  -  so this is actually cheap .
And Einstein said ,  Things should be as simple as possible , but not simpler . 
Thank you .
Rives : If I controlled the Internet
How many poets could cram eBay , Friendster and Monster.com into 3 - minute poem worthy of a standing ovation ? Enjoy Rives unique talent .
I wrote this poem after hearing a pretty well known actress tell a very well known interviewer on television ,  Im really getting into the Internet lately .
I just wish it were more organized . 
So ...
If I controlled the Internet , you could auction your broken heart on eBay .
Take the money ; go to Amazon ; buy a phonebook for a country youve never been to  -  -  call folks at random until you find someone who flirts really well in a foreign language .
If I were in charge of the Internet , you could Mapquest your lovers mood swings .
Hang left at cranky , right at preoccupied , U - turn on silent treatment , all the way back to tongue kissing and good lovin .
You could navigate and understand every emotional intersection .
Some days , Im as shallow as a baking pan , but I still stretch miles in all directions .
If I owned the Internet , Napster , Monster and Friendster.com would be one big website .
That way you could listen to cool music while you pretend to look for a job and youre really just chattin with your pals .
Heck , if I ran the Web , you could email dead people .
They would not email you back  -  -  but youd get an automated reply .
Their name in your inbox  -  -  its all you wanted anyway .
And a message saying ,  Hey , its me . I miss you .
Listen , youll see being dead is dandy .
Now you go back to raising kids and waging peace and craving candy . 
If I designed the Internet , childhood.com would be a loop of a boy in an orchard , with a ski pole for a sword , trashcan lid for a shield , shouting ,  I am the emperor of oranges .
I am the emperor of oranges . I am the emperor of oranges . 
Now follow me , OK ?
Grandma . com would be a recipe for biscuits and spit - bath instructions .
One , two , three .
That links with hotdiggitydog . com .
That is my grandfather .
They take you to gruff - ex - cop - on - his - fourth - marriage . dad .
He forms an attachment to kind - of - ditzy - but - still - sends - ginger - snaps - for - Christmas.mom , who downloads the boy in the orchard , the emperor of oranges , who grows up to be me  -  -  the guy who usually goes too far .
So if I were emperor of the Internet , I guess Id still be mortal , huh ?
But at that point , I would probably already have the lowest possible mortgage and the most enlarged possible penis  -  -  so I would outlaw spam on my first day in office .
I wouldnt need it .
Id be like some kind of Internet genius , and me , Id like to upgrade to deity and maybe just like that  -  -  pop !  -  -  Id go wireless .
Huh ? Maybe Google would hire this .
I could zip through your servers and firewalls like a virus until the World Wide Web is as wise , as wild and as organized as I think a modern - day miracle / oracle can get , but , ooh - eee , you want to bet just how whack and un - PC your Mac or PC is going to be when Im rocking hot - shit - hot - shot - god . net ?
I guess its just like life .
It is not a question of if you can  -  -  its : do ya ?
We can interfere with the interface .
We can make  Youve got Hallelujah  the national anthem of cyberspace every lucky time we log on .
You dont say a prayer .
You dont write a psalm .
You dont chant an  om . 
You send one blessed email to whomever youre thinking of at dah - da - la - dat - da - dah - da - la - dat.com .
Thank you , TED .
Bill Davenhall : Your health depends on where you live
Where you live : It impacts your health as much as diet and genes do , but its not part of your medical records . At TEDMED , Bill Davenhall shows how overlooked government geo - data can mesh with mobile GPS apps to keep doctors in the loop . Call it  geo - medicine . 
Can geographic information make you healthy ?
In 2001 I got hit by a train .
My train was a heart attack .
I found myself in a hospital in an intensive - care ward , recuperating from emergency surgery .
And I suddenly realized something : that I was completely in the dark .
I started asking my questions ,  Well , why me ? 
 Why now ?   Why here ? 
 Could my doctor have warned me ? 
So , what I want to do here in the few minutes I have with you is really talk about what is the formula for life and good health .
Genetics , lifestyle and environment .
Thats going to sort of contain our risks , and if we manage those risks were going to live a good life and a good healthy life .
Well , I understand the genetics and lifestyle part .
And you know why I understand that ?
Because my physicians constantly ask me questions about this .
Have you ever had to fill out those long , legal - size forms in your doctors office ?
I mean , if youre lucky enough you get to do it more than once , right ?
Do it over and over again . And they ask you questions about your lifestyle and your family history , your medication history , your surgical history , your allergy history ... did I forget any history ?
But this part of the equation I didnt really get , and I dont think my physicians really get this part of the equation .
What does that mean , my environment ?
Well , it can mean a lot of things .
This is my life . These are my life places .
We all have these .
While Im talking Id like you to also be thinking about : How many places have you lived ?
Just think about that , you know , wander through your life thinking about this .
And you realize that you spend it in a variety of different places .
You spend it at rest and you spend it at work .
And if youre like me , youre in an airplane a good portion of your time traveling some place .
So , its not really simple when somebody asks you ,  Where do you live , where do you work , and where do you spend all your time ?
And where do you expose yourselves to risks that maybe perhaps you dont even see ? 
Well , when I have done this on myself , I always come to the conclusion that I spend about 75 percent of my time relatively in a small number of places .
And I dont wander far from that place for a majority of my time , even though Im an extensive global trekker .
Now , Im going to take you on a little journey here .
I started off in Scranton , Pennsylvania .
I dont know if anybody might hail from northeastern Pennsylvania , but this is where I spent my first 19 years with my little young lungs .
You know , breathing high concentrations here of sulfur dioxide , carbon dioxide and methane gas , in unequal quantities  -  -  19 years of this .
And if youve been in that part of the country , this is what those piles of burning , smoldering coal waste look like .
So then I decided to leave that part of the world , and I was going to go to the mid - west .
OK , so I ended up in Louisville , Kentucky .
Well , I decided to be neighbors to a place called Rubbertown .
They manufacture plastics . They use large quantities chloroprene and benzene .
Okay , I spent 25 years , in my middle - age lungs now , breathing various concentrations of that .
And on a clear day it always looked like this , so you never saw it .
It was insidious and it was really happening .
Then I decided I had to get really smart , I would take this job in the West Coast .
And I moved to Redlands California .
Very nice , and there my older , senior lungs , as I like to call them , I filled with particulate matter , carbon dioxide and very high doses of ozone .
Okay ? Almost like the highest in the nation .
Alright , this is what it looks like on a good day .
If youve been there , you know what Im talking about .
So , whats wrong with this picture ?
Well , the picture is , there is a huge gap here .
The one thing that never happens in my doctors office : They never ask me about my place history .
No doctor , can I remember , ever asking me ,  Where have you lived ? 
They havent asked me what kind of the quality of the drinking water that I put in my mouth or the food that I ingest into my stomach .
They really dont do that . Its missing .
Look at the kind of data thats available .
This datas from all over the world  -  -  countries spend billions of dollars investing in this kind of research .
Now , Ive circled the places where Ive been .
Well , by design , if I wanted to have a heart attack Id been in the right places . Right ?
So , how many people are in the white ?
How many people in the room have spent the majority of their life in the white space ?
Anybody ? Boy youre lucky .
How many have spent it in the red places ?
Oh , not so lucky .
There are thousands of these kinds of maps that are displayed in atlases all over the world .
They give us some sense of whats going to be our train wreck .
But none of thats in my medical record .
And its not in yours either .
So , heres my friend Paul .
Hes a colleague . He allowed his cell phone to be tracked every two hours , 24 / 7 , 365 days out of the year for the last two years , everywhere he went .
And you can see hes been to a few places around the United States .
And this is where he has spent most of his time .
If you really studied that you might have some clues as to what Paul likes to do .
Anybody got any clues ? Ski . Right .
We can zoom in here , and we suddenly see that now we see where Paul has really spent a majority of his time .
And all of those black dots are all of the toxic release inventories that are monitored by the EPA .
Did you know that data existed ?
For every community in the United States , you could have your own personalized map of that .
So , our cell phones can now build a place history .
This is how Paul did it . He did it with his IPhone .
This might be what we end up with .
This is what the physician would have in front of him and her when we enter that exam room instead of just the pink slip that said I paid at the counter . Right ?
This could be my little assessment .
And he looks at that and he says ,  Whoa Bill , I suggest that maybe you not decide , just because youre out here in beautiful California , and its warm every day , that you get out and run at six oclock at night .
Id suggest that thats a bad idea Bill , because of this report . 
What Id like to leave you for are two prescriptions .
Okay , number one is , we must teach physicians about the value of geographical information .
Its called geomedicine . There are about a half a dozen programs in the world right now that are focused on this .
And theyre in the early stages of development .
These programs need to be supported , and we need to teach our future doctors of the world the importance of some of the information Ive shared here with you today .
The second thing we need to do is while were spending billions and billions of dollars all over the world building an electronic health record , we make sure we put a place history inside that medical record .
It not only will be important for the physician ; it will be important for the researchers that now will have huge samples to draw upon .
But it will also be useful for us .
I could have made the decision , if I had this information , not to move to the ozone capital of the United States , couldnt I ? I could make that decision .
Or I could negotiate with my employer to make that decision in the best interest of myself and my company .
With that , I would like to just say that Jack Lord said this almost 10 years ago .
Just look at that for a minute .
That was what the conclusion of the Dartmouth Atlas of Healthcare was about , was saying that we can explain the geographic variations that occur in disease , in illness , in wellness , and how our healthcare system actually operates .
That was what he was talking about on that quote .
And I would say he got it right almost a decade ago .
So , Id very much like to see us begin to really seize this as an opportunity to get this into our medical records .
So with that , Ill leave you that in my particular view of view of health : Geography always matters .
And I believe that geographic information can make both you and me very healthy . Thank you .
Gary Wolf : The quantified self
At TED @ Cannes , Gary Wolf gives a 5 - min intro to an intriguing new pastime : using mobile apps and always - on gadgets to track and analyze your body , mood , diet , spending  -  -  just about everything in daily life you can measure  -  -  in gloriously geeky detail .
I got up this morning at 6 : 10 a.m .
after going to sleep at 12 : 45 a.m .
I was awakened once during the night .
My heart rate was 61 beats per minute  -  -  my blood pressure , 127 over 74 .
I had zero minutes of exercise yesterday , so my maximum heart rate during exercise wasnt calculated .
I had about 600 milligrams of caffeine , zero of alcohol .
And my score on the Narcissism Personality Index , or the NPI - 16 , is a reassuring 0.31 .
We know that numbers are useful for us when we advertise , manage , govern , search .
Im going to talk about how theyre useful when we reflect , learn , remember and want to improve .
A few years ago , Kevin Kelly , my partner , and I noticed that people were subjecting themselves to regimes of quantitative measurement and self - tracking that went far beyond the ordinary , familiar habits such as stepping on a scale every day .
People were tracking their food via Twitter , their kids diapers on their IPhone .
They were making detailed journals of their spending , their mood , their symptoms , their treatments .
Now , we know some of the technological facts that are driving this change in our lifestyle  -  -  the uptake and diffusion of mobile devices , the exponential improvement in data storage and data processing , and the remarkable improvement in human biometric sensors .
This little black dot there is a 3D accelerometer .
It tracks your movement through space .
It is , as you can see , very small and also very cheap .
Theyre now down to well under a dollar a piece , and theyre going into all kinds of devices .
But whats interesting is the incredible detailed information that you can get from just one sensor like this .
This kind of sensor is in the hit biometric device  -  -  among early adopters at the moment  -  -  the Fitbit .
This tracks your activity and also your sleep .
It has just that sensor in it .
Youre probably familiar with the Nike + system .
I just put it up because that little blue dot is the sensor .
Its really just a pressure sensor like the kind thats in a doorbell .
And Nike knows how to get your pace and distance from just that sensor .
This is the strap that people use to transmit heart - rate data to their Nike + system .
This is a beautiful , new device that gives you detailed sleep tracking data , not just whether youre asleep or awake , but also your phase of sleep  -  -  deep sleep , light sleep , REM sleep .
The sensor is just a little strip of metal in that headband there .
The rest of it is the bedside console ; just for reference , this is a sleep tracking system from just a few years ago  -  -  I mean , really until now .
And this is the sleep tracking system of today .
This just was presented at a health care conference in D.C .
Most of what you see there is an asthma inhaler , but the top is a very small GPS transceiver , which gives you the date and location of an asthma incident , giving you a new awareness of your vulnerability in relation to time and environmental factors .
Now , we know that new tools are changing our sense of self in the world  -  -  these tiny sensors that gather data in nature , the ubiquitous computing that allows that data to be understood and used , and of course the social networks that allow people to collaborate and contribute .
But we think of these tools as pointing outward , as windows and Id just like to invite you to think of them as also turning inward and becoming mirrors .
So that when we think about using them to get some systematic improvement , we also think about how they can be useful for self - improvement , for self - discovery , self - awareness , self - knowledge .
Heres a biometric device : a pair of Apple Earbuds .
Last year , Apple filed some patents to get blood oxygenation , heart rate and body temperature via the Earbuds .
What is this for ?
What should it be for ?
Some people will say its for biometric security .
Some people will say its for public health research .
Some people will say its for avant - garde marketing research .
Id like to tell you that its also for self - knowledge .
And the self isnt the only thing ; its not even most things .
The self is just our operation center , our consciousness , our moral compass .
So , if we want to act more effectively in the world , we have to get to know ourselves better .
Thank you .
JR : My wish : Use art to turn the world inside out
JR , a semi - anonymous French street artist , uses his camera to show the world its true face , by pasting photos of the human face across massive canvases . At TED 2011 , he makes his audacious TED Prize wish : to use art to turn the world inside out . Learn more about his work and learn how you can join in at insideoutproject . net .
Two weeks ago I was in my studio in Paris , and the phone rang and I heard ,  Hey , JR , you won the TED Prize 2011 .
You have to make a wish to save the world . 
I was lost .
I mean , I cant save the world . Nobody can .
The world is fucked up .
Come on , you have dictators ruling the world , population is growing by millions , theres no more fish in the sea , the North Pole is melting and as the last TED Prize winner said , were all becoming fat .
Except maybe French people .
Whatever .
So I called back and I told her ,  Look , Amy , tell the TED guys I just wont show up .
I cant do anything to save the world . 
She said ,  Hey , JR , your wish is not to save the world , but to change the world . 
 Oh , all right . 
 Thats cool . 
I mean , technology , politics , business do change the world  -  -  not always in a good way , but they do .
What about art ?
Could art change the world ?
I started when I was 15 years old .
And at that time , I was not thinking about changing the world .
I was doing graffiti  -  -  writing my name everywhere , using the city as a canvas .
I was going in the tunnels of Paris , on the rooftops with my friends .
Each trip was an excursion , was an adventure .
It was like leaving our mark on society , to say ,  I was here ,  on the top of a building .
So when I found a cheap camera on the subway , I started documenting those adventures with my friends and gave them back as photocopies  -  -  really small photos just that size .
Thats how , at 17 years old , I started pasting them .
And I did my first  expo de rue ,  which means sidewalk gallery .
And I framed it with color so you would not confuse it with advertising .
I mean , the citys the best gallery I could imagine .
I would never have to make a book and then present it to a gallery and let them decide if my work was nice enough to show it to people .
I would control it directly with the public in the streets .
So thats Paris .
I would change  -  -  depending on the places I would go  -  -  the title of the exhibition .
Thats on the Champs - Elysees .
I was quite proud of that one .
Because I was just 18 and I was just up there on the top of the Champs - Elysees .
Then when the photo left , the frame was still there .
November 2005 : the streets are burning .
A large wave of riots had broken into the first projects of Paris .
Everyone was glued to the TV , watching disturbing , frightening images taken from the edge of the neighborhood .
I mean , these kids , without control , throwing Molotov cocktails , attacking the cops and the firemen , looting everything they could in the shops .
These were criminals , thugs , dangerous , destroying their own environment .
And then I saw it  -  -  could it be possible ?  -  -  my photo on a wall revealed by a burning car  -  -  a pasting Id done a year earlier  -  -  an illegal one  -  -  still there .
I mean , these were the faces of my friends .
I know those guys .
All of them are not angels , but theyre not monsters either .
So it was kind of weird to see those images and those eyes stare back at me through a television .
So I went back there with a 28 mm lens .
It was the only one I had at that time .
But with that lens , you have to be as close as 10 inches from the person .
So you can do it only with their trust .
So I took full portraits of people from Le Bosquet .
They were making scary faces to play the caricature of themselves .
And then I pasted huge posters everywhere in the bourgeois area of Paris with the name , age , even building number of these guys .
A year later , the exhibition was displayed in front of the city hall of Paris .
And we go from thug images , whove been stolen and distorted by the media , whos now proudly taking over his own image .
Thats where I realized the power of paper and glue .
So could art change the world ?
A year later , I was listening to all the noise about the Middle East conflict .
I mean , at that time , trust me , they were only referring to the Israeli and Palestinian conflict .
So with my friend Marco , we decided to go there and see who are the real Palestinians and who are the real Israelis .
Are they so different ?
When we got there , we just went in the street , started talking with people everywhere , and we realized that things were a bit different from the rhetoric we heard in the media .
So we decided to take portraits of Palestinians and Israelis doing the same jobs  -  -  taxi - driver , lawyer , cooks .
Asked them to make a face as a sign of commitment .
Not a smile  -  -  that really doesnt tell about who you are and what you feel .
They all accepted to be pasted next to the other .
I decided to paste in eight Israeli and Palestinian cities and on both sides of the wall .
We launched the biggest illegal art exhibition ever .
We called the project Face 2 Face .
The experts said ,  No way .
The people will not accept .
The army will shoot you , and Hamas will kidnap you . 
We said ,  Okay , lets try and push as far as we can . 
I love the way that people will ask me ,  How big will my photo be ? 
 It will be as big as your house . 
When we did the wall , we did the Palestinian side .
So we arrived with just our ladders and we realized that they were not high enough .
And so Palestinians guys say ,  Calm down . No wait . Im going to find you a solution . 
So he went to the Church of Nativity and brought back an old ladder that was so old that it could have seen Jesus being born .
We did Face 2 Face with only six friends , two ladders , two brushes , a rented car , a camera and 20,000 square feet of paper .
We had all sorts of help from all walks of life .
Okay , for example , thats Palestine .
Were in Ramallah right now .
Were pasting portraits  -  -  so both portraits in the streets in a crowded market .
People come around us and start asking ,  What are you doing here ? 
 Oh , were actually doing an art project and we are pasting an Israeli and a Palestinian doing the same job .
And those ones are actually two taxi - drivers . 
And then there was always a silence .
 You mean youre pasting an Israeli face  -  -  doing a face  -  -  right here ? 
 Well , yeah , yeah , thats part of the project . 
And I would always leave that moment , and we would ask them ,  So can you tell me who is who ? 
And most of them couldnt say .
We even pasted on Israeli military towers , and nothing happened .
When you paste an image , its just paper and glue .
People can tear it , tag on it , or even pee on it  -  -  some are a bit high for that , I agree  -  -  but the people in the street , they are the curator .
The rain and the wind will take them off anyway .
They are not meant to stay .
But exactly four years after , the photos , most of them are still there .
Face 2 Face demonstrated that what we thought impossible was possible  -  -  and , you know what , even easy .
We didnt push the limit ; we just showed that they were further than anyone thought .
In the Middle East , I experienced my work in places without  many  museums .
So the reactions in the street were kind of interesting .
So I decided to go further in this direction and go in places where there were zero museums .
When you go in these developing societies , women are the pillars of their community , but the men are still the ones holding the streets .
So we were inspired to create a project where men will pay tribute to women by posting their photos .
I called that project Women Are Heroes .
When I listened to all the stories everywhere I went on the continents , I couldnt always understand the complicated circumstances of their conflict .
I just observed .
Sometimes there was no words , no sentence , just tears .
I just took their pictures and pasted them .
Women Are Heroes took me around the world .
Most of the places I went to , I decided to go there because Ive heard about it through the media .
So for example , in June 2008 , I was watching TV in Paris , and then I heard about this terrible thing that happened in Rio de Janeiro  -  -  the first favela of Brazil named Providencia .
Three kids  -  -  that was three students  -  -  were  detained  by the army because they were not carrying their papers .
And the army took them , and instead of bringing them to the police station , they brought them to an enemy favela where they get chopped into pieces .
I was shocked .
All Brazil was shocked .
I heard it was one of the most violent favelas , because the largest drug cartel controls it .
So I decided to go there .
When I arrived  -  -  I mean , I didnt have any contact with any NGO .
There was none in place  -  -  no association , no NGOs , nothing  -  -  no eyewitnesses .
So we just walked around , and we met a woman , and I showed her my book .
And she said ,  You know what ?
Were hungry for culture .
We need culture out there . 
So I went out and I started with the kids .
I just took a few photos of the kids , and the next day I came with the posters and we pasted them .
The day after , I came back and they were already scratched .
But thats okay .
I wanted them to feel that this art belongs to them .
Then the next day , I held a meeting on the main square and some women came .
They were all linked to the three kids that got killed .
There was the mother , the grandmother , the best friend  -  -  they all wanted to shout the story .
After that day , everyone in the favela gave me the green light .
I took more photos , and we started the project .
The drug lords were kind of worried about us filming in the place , so I told them ,  You know what ?
Im not interested in filming the violence and the weapons .
You see that enough in the media .
What I want to show is the incredible life and energy .
Ive been seeing it around me the last few days . 
So thats a really symbolic pasting , because thats the first one we did that you couldnt see from the city .
And thats where the three kids got arrested , and thats the grandmother of one of them .
And on that stairs , thats where the traffickers always stand and theres a lot of exchange of fire .
Everyone there understood the project .
And then we pasted everywhere  -  -  the whole hill .
What was interesting is that the media couldnt get in .
I mean , you should see that .
They would have to film us from a really long distance by helicopter and then have a really long lens , and we would see ourselves , on TV , pasting .
And they would put a number :  Please call this number if you know whats going on in Providencia . 
We just did a project and then left so the media wouldnt know .
So how can we know about the project ?
So they had to go and find the women and get an explanation from them .
So you create a bridge between the media and the anonymous women .
We kept traveling .
We went to Africa , Sudan , Sierra Leone , Liberia , Kenya .
In war - torn places like Monrovia , people come straight to you .
I mean , they want to know what youre up to .
They kept asking me ,  What is the purpose of your project ?
Are you an NGO ? Are you the media ? 
Art . Just doing art .
Some people question ,  Why is it in black and white ?
Dont you have color in France ? 
Or they tell you ,  Are these people all dead ? 
Some who understood the project would explain it to others .
And to a man who did not understand , I heard someone say ,  You know , youve been here for a few hours trying to understand , discussing with your fellows .
During that time , you havent thought about what youre going to eat tomorrow .
This is art . 
I think its peoples curiosity that motivates them to come into the projects .
And then it becomes more .
It becomes a desire , a need , an armor .
On this bridge thats in Monrovia , ex - rebel soldiers helped us pasting a portrait of a woman that might have been raped during the war .
Women are always the first ones targeted during conflict .
This is Kibera , Kenya , one of the largest slums of Africa .
You might have seen images about the post - election violence that happened there in 2008 .
This time we covered the roofs of the houses , but we didnt use paper , because paper doesnt prevent the rain from leaking inside the house  -  -  vinyl does .
Then art becomes useful .
So the people kept it .
You know what I love is , for example , when you see the biggest eye there , there are so  many  houses inside .
And I went there a few months ago  -  -  photos are still there  -  -  and it was missing a piece of the eye .
So I asked the people what happened .
 Oh , that guy just moved . 
When the roofs were covered , a woman said as a joke ,  Now God can see me . 
When you look at Kibera now , they look back .
Okay , India .
Before I start that , just so you know , each time we go to a place , we dont have authorization , so we set up like commandos  -  -  were a group of friends who arrive there , and we try to paste on the walls .
But there are places where you just cant paste on a wall .
In India it was just impossible to paste .
I heard culturally and because of the law , they would just arrest us at the first pasting .
So we decided to paste white , white on the walls .
So imagine white guys pasting white papers .
So people would come to us and ask us ,  Hey , what are you up to ? 
 Oh , you know , were just doing art .   Art ? 
Of course , they were confused .
But you know how India has a lot of dust in the streets , and the more dust you would have going up in the air , on the white paper you can almost see , but there is this sticky part like when you reverse a sticker .
So the more dust you have , the more it will reveal the photo .
So we could just walk in the street during the next days and the photos would get revealed by themselves .
Thank you .
So we didnt get caught this time .
Each project  -  -  thats a film from Women Are Heroes .
Okay .
For each project we do a film .
And most of what you see  -  -  thats a trailer from  Women Are Heroes   -  -  its images , photography , taken one after the other .
And the photos kept traveling even without us .
Hopefully , youll see the film , and youll understand the scope of the project and what the people felt when they saw those photos .
Because thats a big part of it . Theres layers behind each photo .
Behind each image is a story .
Women Are Heroes created a new dynamic in each of the communities , and the women kept that dynamic after we left .
For example , we did books  -  -  not for sale  -  -  that all the community would get .
But to get it , they would have to  get  it signed by one of the women .
We did that in most of the places .
We go back regularly .
And so in Providencia , for example , in the favela , we have a cultural center running there .
In Kibera , each year we cover more roofs .
Because of course , when we left , the people who were just at the edge of the project said ,  Hey , what about my roof ? 
So we decided to come the year after and keep doing the project .
A really important point for me is that I dont use any brand or corporate sponsors .
So I have no responsibility to anyone but myself and the subjects .
And that is for me one of the more important things in the work .
I think , today , as important as the result is the way you do things .
And that has always been a central part of the work .
And whats interesting is that fine line that I have with images and advertising .
We just did some pasting in Los Angeles on another project in the last weeks .
And I was even invited to cover the MOCA museum .
But yesterday the city called them and said ,  Look , youre going to have to tear it down .
Because this can be taken for advertising , and because of the law , it has to be taken down . 
But tell me , advertising for what ?
The people I photograph were proud to participate in the project and to have their photo in the community .
But they asked me for a promise basically .
They asked me ,  Please , make our story travel with you . 
So I did . Thats Paris .
Thats Rio .
In each place , we built exhibitions with a story , and the story traveled .
You understand the full scope of the project .
Thats London .
New York .
And today , they are with you in Long Beach .
All right , recently I started a public art project where I dont use my artwork anymore .
I use Man Ray , Helen Levitt , Giacomelli , other peoples artwork .
It doesnt matter today if its your photo or not .
The importance is what you do with the images , the statement it makes where its pasted .
So for example , I pasted the photo of the minaret in Switzerland a few weeks after they voted the law forbidding minarets in the country .
This image of three men wearing gas masks was taken in Chernobyl originally , and I pasted it in Southern Italy , where the mafia sometimes bury the garbage under the ground .
In some ways , art can change the world .
Art is not supposed to change the world , to change practical things , but to change perceptions .
Art can change the way we see the world .
Art can create an analogy .
Actually the fact that art can not change things makes it a neutral place for exchanges and discussions , and then enables you to change the world .
When I do my work , I have two kinds of reactions .
People say ,  Oh , why dont you go in Iraq or Afghanistan .
They would be really useful . 
Or ,  How can we help ? 
I presume that you belong to the second category , and thats good , because for that project , Im going to ask you to take the photos and paste them .
So now my wish is : I wish for you to stand up for what you care about by participating in a global art project , and together well turn the world inside out .
And this starts right now .
Yes , everyone in the room .
Everyone watching .
I wanted that wish to actually start now .
So a subject youre passionate about , a person who you want to tell their story or even your own photos  -  -  tell me what you stand for .
Take the photos , the portraits , upload it  -  -  Ill give you all the details  -  -  and Ill send you back your poster . Join by groups and reveal things to the world .
The full data is on the website  -  -  insideoutproject . net  -  -  that is launching today .
What we see changes who we are .
When we act together , the whole thing is much more than the sum of the parts .
So I hope that , together , well create something that the world will remember .
And this starts right now and depends on you .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Suzanne Lee : Grow your own clothes
Designer Suzanne Lee shares her experiments in growing a kombucha - based material that can be used like fabric or vegetable leather to make clothing . The process is fascinating , the results are beautiful and the potential is simply stunning .
So as a fashion designer , Ive always tended to think of materials something like this , or this , or maybe this .
But then I met a biologist , and now I think of materials like this  -  -  green tea , sugar , a few microbes and a little time .
Im essentially using a kombucha recipe , which is a symbiotic mix of bacteria , yeasts and other micro - organisms , which spin cellulose in a fermentation process .
Over time , these tiny threads form in the liquid into layers and produce a mat on the surface .
So we start by brewing the tea .
I brew up to about 30 liters of tea at a time , and then while its still hot , add a couple of kilos of sugar .
We stir this in until its completely dissolved and then pour it into a growth bath .
We need to check that the temperature has cooled to below 30 degrees C .
And then were ready to add the living organism .
And along with that , some acetic acid .
And once you get this process going , you can actually recycle your previous fermented liquid .
We need to maintain an optimum temperature for the growth .
And I use a heat mat to sit the bath on and a thermostat to regulate it .
And actually , in hot weather , I can just grow it outside .
So this is my mini fabric farm .
After about three days , the bubbles will appear on the surface of the liquid .
So this is telling us that the fermentation is in full swing .
And the bacteria are feeding on the sugar nutrients in the liquid .
So theyre spinning these tiny nano fibers of pure cellulose .
And theyre sticking together , forming layers and giving us a sheet on the surface .
After about two to three weeks , were looking at something which is about an inch in thickness .
So the bath on the left is after five days , and on the right , after 10 .
And this is a static culture .
You dont have to do anything to it ; you just literally watch it grow .
It doesnt need light .
And when its ready to harvest , you take it out of the bath and you wash it in cold , soapy water .
At this point , its really heavy .
Its over 90 percent water , so we need to let that evaporate .
So I spread it out onto a wooden sheet .
Again , you can do that outside and just let it dry in the air .
And as its drying , its compressing , so what youre left with , depending on the recipe , is something thats either like a really light - weight , transparent paper , or something which is much more like a flexible vegetable leather .
And then you can either cut that out and sew it conventionally , or you can use the wet material to form it around a three - dimensional shape .
And as it evaporates , it will knit itself together , forming seams .
So the color in this jacket is coming purely from green tea .
I guess it also looks a little bit like human skin , which intrigues me .
Since its organic , Im really keen to try and minimize the addition of any chemicals .
I can make it change color without using dye by a process of iron oxidation .
Using fruit and vegetable staining , create organic patterning .
And using indigo , make it anti - microbial .
And in fact , cotton would take up to 18 dips in indigo to achieve a color this dark .
And because of the super - absorbency of this kind of cellulose , it just takes one , and a really short one at that .
What I cant yet do is make it water - resistant .
So if I was to walk outside in the rain wearing this dress today , I would immediately start to absorb huge amounts of water .
The dress would get really heavy , and eventually the seams would probably fall apart  -  -  leaving me feeling rather naked .
Possibly a good performance piece , but definitely not ideal for everyday wear .
What Im looking for is a way to give the material the qualities that I need .
So what I want to do is say to a future bug ,  Spin me a thread .
Align it in this direction .
Make it hydrophobic .
And while youre at it , just form it around this 3D shape . 
Bacterial cellulose is actually already being used for wound healing , and possibly in the future for biocompatible blood vessels , possibly even replacement bone tissue .
But with synthetic biology , we can actually imagine engineering this bacterium to produce something that gives us the quality , quantity and shape of material that we desire .
Obviously , as a designer , thats really exciting because then I start to think , wow , we could actually imagine growing consumable products .
What excites me about using microbes is their efficiency .
So we only grow what we need .
Theres no waste .
And in fact , we could make it from a waste stream  -  -  so for example , a waste sugar stream from a food processing plant .
Finally , at the end of use , we could biodegrade it naturally along with your vegetable peelings .
What Im not suggesting is that microbial cellulose is going to be a replacement for cotton , leather or other textile materials .
But I do think it could be quite a smart and sustainable addition to our increasingly precious natural resources .
Ultimately , maybe it wont even be fashion where we see these microbes have their impact .
We could , for example , imagine growing a lamp , a chair , a car or maybe even a house .
So I guess what my question to you is : in the future , what would you choose to grow ?
Thank you very much .
Suzanne , just a curiosity , what youre wearing is not random .
This is one of the jackets you grew ?
SL : Yes , it is .
Its probably  -  -  part of the projects still in process because this one is actually biodegrading in front of your eyes .
Its absorbing my sweat , and its feeding on it .
Okay , so well let you go and save it , and rescue it .
Suzanne Lee .
Jon Nguyen : Tour the solar system from home
Want to navigate the solar system without having to buy that expensive spacecraft ? Jon Nguyen demos NASAJPLs  Eyes on the Solar System   -  -  free - to - use software for exploring the planets , moons , asteroids , and spacecraft that rotate around our sun in real - time .
As a kid , I was fascinated with all things air and space .
I would watch Nova on PBS .
Our school would show Bill Nye the Science Guy .
When I was in elementary school , my next door neighbor , he gave me a book for my birthday .
It was an astronomy book , and I poured over that thing for hours on end , and it was a combination of all these things that inspired me to pursue space exploration as my own personal dream , and part of that dream was , I always wanted to just fly around the solar system and visit different planets and visit moons and spacecraft .
Well , a number of years later , I graduated from UCLA and I found myself at NASA , working for the jet propulsion laboratory , and there our team was challenged to create a 3D visualization of the solar system , and today I want to show you what weve done so far .
Now , the kicker is , everything Im about to do here you can do at home , because we built this for the public for you guys to use .
So what youre looking at right now is the Earth .
You can see the United States and California and San Diego , and you can use the mouse or the keyboard to spin things around .
Now , this isnt new . Anyone whos used Google Earth has seen this before , but one thing we like to say in our group is , we do the opposite of Google Earth .
Google Earth goes from this view down to your backyard .
We go from this view out to the stars .
So the Earth is cool , but what we really want to show are the spacecraft , so Im going to bring the interface back up , and now youre looking at a number of satellites orbiting the Earth .
These are a number of our science space Earth orbiters .
We havent included military satellites and weather satellites and communication satellites and reconnaissance satellites .
If we did , it would be a complete mess , because theres a lot of stuff out there .
And the cool thing is , we actually created 3D models for a number of these spacecraft , so if you want to visit any of these , all you need to do is double - click on them .
So Im going to find the International Space Station , double - click , and it will take us all the way down to the ISS .
And now youre riding along with the ISS where it is right now .
And the other cool thing is , not only can we move the camera around , we can also control time , so I can slide this jog dial here to shuttle time forward , and now we can see what a sunset on the ISS would look like , and they get one every 90 minutes .
All right , so what about the rest of it ?
Well , I can click on this home button over here , and that will take us up to the inner solar system , and now were looking at the rest of the solar system .
You can see , theres Saturn , theres Jupiter , and while were here , I want to point out something .
Its actually pretty busy .
Here we have the Mars Science Laboratory on its way to Mars , just launched last weekend .
Here we have Juno on its cruise to Jupiter , there .
We have Dawn orbiting Vesta , and we have over here New Horizons on a straight shot to Pluto .
And I mention this because theres this strange public perception that NASAs dead , that the space shuttles stopped flying and all of the sudden theres no more spacecraft out there .
Well , a lot of what NASA does is robotic exploration , and we have a lot of spacecraft out there .
Granted , were not sending humans up at the moment , well at least with our own launch vehicles , but NASA is far from dead , and one of the reasons why we write a program like this is so that people realize that theres so many other things that were doing .
Anyway , while were here , again , if you want to visit anything , all you need to do is double - click .
So Im just going to double - click on Vesta , and here we have Dawn orbiting Vesta , and this is happening right now .
Im going to double - click on Uranus , and we can see Uranus rotating on its side along with its moons .
You can see how its tilted at about 89 degrees .
And just being able to visit different places and go through different times , we have data from 1950 to 2050 .
Granted , we dont have everything in between , because some of the data is hard to get .
Just being able to visit places in different times , you can explore this for hours , literally hours on end , but I want to show you one thing in particular , so Im going to open up the destination tab , spacecraft outer planet missions , Voyager 1 , and Im going to bring up the Titan flyby .
So now weve gone back in time .
Were now riding along with Voyager 1 .
The date here is November 11 , 1980 .
Now , theres a funny thing going on here .
It doesnt look like anythings going on .
It looks like Ive paused the program .
Its actually running at real rate right now , one second per second , and in fact , Voyager 1 here is flying by Titan at I think its 38,000 miles per hour .
It only looks like nothings moving because , well , Saturn here is 700,000 miles away , and Titan here is 4,000 to 5,000 miles away .
Its just the vastness of space makes it look like nothings happening .
But to make it more interesting , Im going to speed up time , and we can watch as Voyager 1 flies by Titan , which is a hazy moon of Saturn .
It actually has a very thick atmosphere .
And Im going to recenter the camera on Saturn , here .
Im going to pull out , and I want to show you Voyager 1 as it flies by Saturn .
Theres a point to be made here .
With a 3D visualization like this , we can not only just say Voyager 1 flew by Saturn .
Theres a whole story to tell here .
And even better , because its an interactive application , you can tell the story for yourself .
If you want to pause it , you can pause it .
If you want to keep going , if you want to change the camera angle , you can do that , and because of that , I can show you that Voyager 1 doesnt just fly by Saturn .
It actually flies underneath Saturn .
Now , what happens is , as it flies underneath Saturn , Saturn grabs it gravitationally and flings it up and out of the solar system , so if I just keep letting this go , you can see Voyager 1 fly up like that .
And , in fact , Im going to go back to the solar system .
Im going to go back to today , now , and I want to show you where Voyager 1 is .
Right there , above , way above the solar system , way beyond our solar system .
And heres the thing . Now you know how it got there .
Now you know why , and to me , thats the point of this program .
You can manipulate it yourself .
You can fly around yourself and you can learn for yourself .
You know , the theme today is  The World In Your Grasp . 
Well , were trying to give you the solar system in your grasp — — and we hope once its there , youll be able to learn for yourself what weve done out there , and what were about to do .
And my personal dream is for kids to take this and explore and see the wonders out there and be inspired , as I was as a kid , to pursue STEM education and to pursue a dream in space exploration .
Thank you .
Quixotic Fusion : Dancing with light
Quixotic Fusion is an ensemble of artists that brings together aerial acrobatics , dance , theater , film , music and visual fx . Watch as they perform three transporting dance pieces at TED2012 .
Andreas Raptopoulos : No roads ? Theres a drone for that
A billion people in the world lack access to all - season roads . Could the structure of the internet provide a model for how to reach them ? Andreas Raptopoulos of Matternet thinks so . He introduces a new type of transportation system that uses electric autonomous flying machines to deliver medicine , food , goods and supplies wherever they are needed .
One billion people in the world today do not have access to all - season roads .
One billion people .
One seventh of the Earths population are totally cut off for some part of the year .
We can not get medicine to them reliably , they can not get critical supplies , and they can not get their goods to market in order to create a sustainable income .
In sub - Saharan Africa , for instance , 85 percent of roads are unusable in the wet season .
Investments are being made , but at the current level , its estimated its going to take them 50 years to catch up .
In the U.S . alone , theres more than four million miles of roads , very expensive to build , very expensive to maintain infrastructure , with a huge ecological footprint , and yet , very often , congested .
So we saw this and we thought , can there be a better way ?
Can we create a system using todays most advanced technologies that can allow this part of the world to leapfrog in the same way theyve done with mobile telephones in the last 10 years ?
Many of those nations have excellent telecommunications today without ever putting copper lines in the ground .
Could we do the same for transportation ?
Imagine this scenario .
Imagine you are in a maternity ward in Mali , and have a newborn in need of urgent medication .
What would you do today ?
Well , you would place a request via mobile phone , and someone would get the request immediately .
Thats the part that works .
The medication may take days to arrive , though , because of bad roads .
Thats the part thats broken .
We believe we can deliver it within hours with an electric autonomous flying vehicle such as this .
This can transport a small payload today , about two kilograms , over a short distance , about 10 kilometers , but its part of a wider network that may cover the entire country , maybe even the entire continent .
Its an ultra - flexible , automated logistics network .
Its a network for a transportation of matter .
We call it Matternet .
We use three key technologies .
The first is electric autonomous flying vehicles .
The second is automated ground stations that the vehicles fly in and out of to swap batteries and fly farther , or pick up or deliver loads .
And the third is the operating system that manages the whole network .
Lets look at each one of those technologies in a bit more detail .
First of all , the UAVs .
Eventually , were going to be using all sorts of vehicles for different payload capacities and different ranges .
Today , were using small quads .
These are able to transport two kilograms over 10 kilometers in just about 15 minutes .
Compare this with trying to trespass a bad road in the developing world , or even being stuck in traffic in a developed world country .
These fly autonomously .
This is the key to the technology .
So they use GPS and other sensors on board to navigate between ground stations .
Every vehicle is equipped with an automatic payload and battery exchange mechanism , so these vehicles navigate to those ground stations , they dock , swap a battery automatically , and go out again .
The ground stations are located on safe locations on the ground .
They secure the most vulnerable part of the mission , which is the landing .
They are at known locations on the ground , so the paths between them are also known , which is very important from a reliability perspective from the whole network .
Apart from fulfilling the energy requirements of the vehicles , eventually theyre going to be becoming commercial hubs where people can take out loads or put loads into the network .
The last component is the operating system that manages the whole network .
It monitors weather data from all the ground stations and optimizes the routes of the vehicles through the system to avoid adverse weather conditions , avoid other risk factors , and optimize the use of the resources throughout the network .
I want to show you what one of those flights looks like .
Here we are flying in Haiti last summer , where weve done our first field trials .
Were modeling here a medical delivery in a camp we set up after the 2010 earthquake .
People there love this .
And I want to show you what one of those vehicles looks like up close .
So this is a $ 3,000 vehicle .
Costs are coming down very rapidly .
We use this in all sorts of weather conditions , very hot and very cold climates , very strong winds . Theyre very sturdy vehicles .
Imagine if your life depended on this package , somewhere in Africa or in New York City , after Sandy .
The next big question is , whats the cost ?
Well , it turns out that the cost to transport two kilograms over 10 kilometers with this vehicle is just 24 cents .
And its counterintuitive , but the cost of energy expended for the flight is only two cents of a dollar today , and were just at the beginning of this .
When we saw this , we felt that this is something that can have significant impact in the world .
So we said , okay , how much does it cost to set up a network somewhere in the world ?
And we looked at setting up a network in Lesotho for transportation of HIV / AIDS samples .
The problem there is how do you take them from clinics where theyre being collected to hospitals where theyre being analyzed ?
And we said , what if we wanted to cover an area spanning around 140 square kilometers ?
Thats roughly one and a half times the size of Manhattan .
Well it turns out that the cost to do that there would be less than a million dollars .
Compare this to normal infrastructure investments .
We think this can be  -  -  this is the power of a new paradigm .
So here we are : a new idea about a network for transportation that is based on the ideas of the Internet .
Its decentralized , its peer - to - peer , its bidirectional , highly adaptable , with very low infrastructure investment , very low ecological footprint .
If it is a new paradigm , though , there must be other uses for it .
It can be used perhaps in other places in the world .
So lets look at the other end of the spectrum : our cities and megacities .
Half of the Earths population lives in cities today .
Half a billion of us live in megacities .
We are living through an amazing urbanization trend .
China alone is adding a megacity the size of New York City every two years .
These are places that do have road infrastructure , but its very inefficient .
Congestion is a huge problem .
So we think it makes sense in those places to set up a network of transportation that is a new layer that sits between the road and the Internet , initially for lightweight , urgent stuff , and over time , we would hope to develop this into a new mode of transportation that is truly a modern solution to a very old problem .
Its ultimately scalable with a very small ecological footprint , operating in the background 24 / 7 , just like the Internet .
So when we started this a couple of years ago now , weve had a lot of people come up to us who said ,  This is a very interesting but crazy idea , and certainly not something that you should engage with anytime soon . 
And of course , were talking about drones , right , a technology thats not only unpopular in the West but one that has become a very , very unpleasant fact of life for many living in poor countries , especially those engaged in conflict .
So why are we doing this ?
Well , we chose to do this one not because its easy , but because it can have amazing impact .
Imagine one billion people being connected to physical goods in the same way that mobile telecommunications connected them to information .
Imagine if the next big network we built in the world was a network for the transportation of matter .
In the developing world , we would hope to reach millions of people with better vaccines , reach them with better medication .
It would give us an unfair advantage against battling HIV / AIDS , tuberculosis and other epidemics .
Over time , we would hope it would become a new platform for economic transactions , lifting millions of people out of poverty .
In the developed world and the emerging world , we would hope it would become a new mode of transportation that could help make our cities more livable .
So for those that still believe that this is science fiction , I firmly say to you that it is not .
We do need to engage , though , in social fiction to make it happen .
Thank you .
Rives : Reinventing the encyclopedia game
Prompted by the Encyclopaedia Britannica ending its print publication , performance poet Rives resurrects a game from his childhood . Speaking at the TEDxSummit in Doha , Rives takes us on a charming tour through random bits of human knowledge : from Chimborazo , the farthest point from the center of the Earth , to Ham the Astrochimp , the first chimpanzee in outer space .
So , last month , the Encyclopaedia Britannica announced that it is going out of print after 244 years , which made me nostalgic , because I remember playing a game with the colossal encyclopedia set in my hometown library back when I was a kid , maybe 12 years old .
And I wondered if I could update that game , not just for modern methods , but for the modern me .
So I tried .
I went to an online encyclopedia , Wikipedia , and I entered the term  Earth . 
You can start anywhere , this time I chose Earth .
And the first rule of the game is pretty simple .
You just have to read the article until you find something you dont know , and preferably something your dad doesnt even know .
And in this case , I quickly found this : The furthest point from the center of the Earth is not the tip of Mount Everest , like I might have thought , its the tip of this mountain : Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador .
The Earth spins , of course , as it travels around the sun , so the Earth bulges a little bit around the middle , like some Earthlings .
And even though Mount Chimborazo isnt the tallest mountain in the Andes , its one degree away from the equator , its riding that bulge , and so the summit of Chimborazo is the farthest point on Earth from the center of the Earth .
And it is really fun to say .
So I immediately decided , this is going to be the name of the game , or my new exclamation .
You can use it at TED .
Chimborazo , right ?
Its like  eureka  and  bingo  had a baby .
I didnt know that ; thats pretty cool .
Chimborazo !
So the next rule of the game is also pretty simple .
You just have to find another term and look that up .
Now in the old days , that meant getting out a volume and browsing through it alphabetically , maybe getting sidetracked , that was fun .
Nowadays there are hundreds of links to choose from .
I can go literally anywhere in the world , I think since I was already in Ecuador , I just decided to click on the word  tropical . 
That took me to this wet and warm band of the tropics that encircles the Earth .
Now thats the Tropic of Cancer in the north and the Tropic of Capricorn in the south , that much I knew , but I was surprised to learn this little fact : Those are not cartographers lines , like latitude or the borders between nations , they are astronomical phenomena caused by the Earths tilt , and they change .
They move ; they go up , they go down .
In fact , for years , the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn have been steadily drifting towards the equator at the rate of about 15 meters per year , and nobody told me that .
I didnt know it .
Chimborazo !
So to keep the game going , I just have to find another term and look that one up .
Since Im already in the tropics , I chose  Tropical rainforest . 
Famous for its diversity , human diversity .
There are still dozens and dozens of uncontacted tribes living on this planet .
Theyre all over the globe , but virtually all of them live in tropical rainforests .
This is the only place you can go nowadays and not get  friended . 
The link that I clicked on here was exotic in the beginning and then absolutely mysterious at the very end .
It mentioned leopards and ring - tailed coatis and poison dart frogs and boa constrictors and then coleoptera , which turn out to be beetles .
Now I clicked on this on purpose , but if Id somehow gotten here by mistake , it does remind me , for the band , see  The Beatles ,  for the car see  Volkswagon Beetle ,  but I am here for beetle beetles .
This is the most successful order on the planet by far .
Something between 20 and 25 percent of all life forms on the planet , including plants , are beetles .
That means the next time you are in the grocery store , take a look at the four people ahead of you in line .
Statistically , one of you is a beetle .
And if it is you , you are astonishingly well adapted .
There are scavenger beetles that pick the skin and flesh off of bones in museums .
There are predator beetles , that attack other insects and still look pretty cute to us .
There are beetles that roll little balls of dung great distances across the desert floor to feed to their hatchlings .
This reminded the ancient Egyptians of their god Khepri , who renews the ball of the sun every morning , which is how that dung - rolling scarab became that sacred scarab on the breastplate of the Pharaoh Tutankhamun .
Beetles , I was reminded , have the most romantic flirtation in the animal kingdom .
Fireflies are not flies , fireflies are beetles .
Fireflies are coleoptera , and coleoptera communicate in other ways as well .
Like my next link : The chemical language of pheromones .
Now the pheromone page took me to a video of a sea urchin having sex .
Yeah .
And the link to aphrodisiac .
Now thats something that increases sexual desire , possibly chocolate .
There is a compound in chocolate called phenethylamine that might be an aphrodisiac .
But as the article mentions , because of enzyme breakdown , its unlikely that phenethylamine will reach your brain if taken orally .
So those of you who only eat your chocolate , you might have to experiment .
The link I clicked on here ,  sympathetic magic ,  mostly because I understand what both of those words mean .
But not when theyre together like that .
I do like sympathy . I do like magic .
So when I click on  sympathetic magic ,  I get sympathetic magic and voodoo dolls .
This is the boy in me getting lucky again .
Sympathetic magic is imitation .
If you imitate something , maybe you can have an effect on it .
Thats the idea behind voodoo dolls , and possibly also cave paintings .
The link to cave paintings takes me to some of the oldest art known to humankind .
I would love to see Google maps inside some of these caves .
Weve got tens - of - thousands - years - old artwork .
Common themes around the globe include large wild animals and tracings of human hands , usually the left hand .
We have been a dominantly right - handed tribe for millenia , so even though I dont know why a paleolithic person would trace his hand or blow pigment on it from a tube , I can easily picture how he did it .
And I really dont think its that different form our own little dominant hand avatar right there that Im going to use now to click on the term for  hand ,  go to the page for  hand ,  where I found the most fun and possibly embarrassing bit of trivia Ive found in a long time . Its simply this : The back of the hand is formally called the opisthenar .
Now thats embarrassing , because up until now , every time Ive said ,  I know it like the back of my hand ,  Ive really been saying ,  Im totally familiar with that , I just dont know its freaking name , right ? 
And the link I clicked on here , well , lemurs , monkeys and chimpanzees have the little opisthenar .
I click on chimpanzee , and I get our closest genetic relative .
Pan troglodytes , the name we give him , means  cave dweller . 
He doesnt .
He lives in rainforests and savannas .
Its just that were always thinking of this guy as lagging behind us , evolutionarily or somehow uncannily creeping up on us , and in some cases , he gets places before us .
Like my next link , the almost irresistible link , Ham the Astrochimp .
I click on him , and I really thought he was going to bring me full circle twice , in fact .
Hes born in Cameroon , which is smack in the middle of my tropics map , and more specifically his skeleton wound up in the Smithsonian museum getting picked clean by beetles .
In between those two landmarks in Hams life , he flew into space .
He experienced weightlessness and re - entry months before the first human being to do it , Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin .
When I click on Yuri Gagarins page , I get this guy who was surprisingly short in stature , huge in heroism .
Top estimates , Soviet estimates , put this guy at 1.65 meters , that is less than five and a half feet tall max , possibly because he was malnourished as a child .
Germans occupied Russia .
A Nazi officer took over the Gagarin household , and he and his family built and lived in a mud hut .
Years later , the boy from that cramped mud hut would grow up to be the man in that cramped capsule on the tip of a rocket who volunteered to be launched into outer space , the first one of any of us to really physically leave this planet .
And he didnt just leave it , he circled it once .
Fifty years later , as a tribute , the International Space Station , which is still up there tonight , synced its orbit with Gagarins orbit , at the exact same time of day , and filmed it , so you can go online and you can watch over 100 minutes of what must have been an absolutely mesmerizing ride , possibly a lonely one , the first person to ever see such a thing .
And then when youve had your fill of that , you can click on one more link .
You can come back to Earth .
You return to where you started .
You can finish your game .
You just need to find one more fact that you didnt know .
And for me , I quickly landed on this one : The Earth has a tolerance of about .17 percent from the reference spheroid , which is less than the .22 percent allowed in billiard balls .
This is the kind of fact I would have loved as a boy .
I found it myself .
Its got some math that I can do .
Im pretty sure my dad doesnt know it .
What this means is that if you could shrink the Earth to the size of a billiard ball , if you could take planet Earth , with all its mountain tops and caves and rainforests , astronauts and uncontacted tribes and chimpanzees , voodoo dolls , fireflies , chocolate , sea creatures making love in the deep blue sea , you just shrink that to the size of a billiard ball , it would be as smooth as a billiard ball , presumably a billiard ball with a slight bulge around the middle .
Thats pretty cool .
I didnt know that .
Chimborazo !
Thank you .
Fiorenzo Omenetto : Silk , the ancient material of the future
Fiorenzo Omenetto shares 20 + astonishing new uses for silk , one of natures most elegant materials  -  -  in transmitting light , improving sustainability , adding strength and making medical leaps and bounds . On stage , he shows a few intriguing items made of the versatile stuff .
Thank you .
Im thrilled to be here .
Im going to talk about a new , old material that still continues to amaze us , and that might impact the way we think about material science , high technology  -  -  and maybe , along the way , also do some stuff for medicine and for global health and help reforestation .
So thats kind of a bold statement .
Ill tell you a little bit more .
This material actually has some traits that make it seem almost too good to be true .
Its sustainable ; its a sustainable material that is processed all in water and at room temperature  -  -  and is biodegradable with a clock , so you can watch it dissolve instantaneously in a glass of water or have it stable for years .
Its edible ; its implantable in the human body without causing any immune response .
It actually gets reintegrated in the body .
And its technological , so it can do things like microelectronics , and maybe photonics do .
And the material looks something like this .
In fact , this material you see is clear and transparent .
The components of this material are just water and protein .
So this material is silk .
So its kind of different from what were used to thinking about silk .
So the question is , how do you reinvent something that has been around for five millennia ?
The process of discovery , generally , is inspired by nature .
And so we marvel at silk worms  -  -  the silk worm you see here spinning its fiber .
The silk worm does a remarkable thing : it uses these two ingredients , protein and water , that are in its gland , to make a material that is exceptionally tough for protection  -  -  so comparable to technical fibers like Kevlar .
And so in the reverse engineering process that we know about , and that were familiar with , for the textile industry , the textile industry goes and unwinds the cocoon and then weaves glamorous things .
We want to know how you go from water and protein to this liquid Kevlar , to this natural Kevlar .
So the insight is how do you actually reverse engineer this and go from cocoon to gland and get water and protein that is your starting material .
And this is an insight that came , about two decades ago , from a person that Im very fortunate to work with , David Kaplan .
And so we get this starting material .
And so this starting material is back to the basic building block .
And then we use this to do a variety of things  -  -  like , for example , this film .
And we take advantage of something that is very simple .
The recipe to make those films is to take advantage of the fact that proteins are extremely smart at what they do .
They find their way to self - assemble .
So the recipe is simple : you take the silk solution , you pour it , and you wait for the protein to self - assemble .
And then you detach the protein and you get this film , as the proteins find each other as the water evaporates .
But I mentioned that the film is also technological .
And so what does that mean ?
It means that you can interface it with some of the things that are typical of technology , like microelectronics and nanoscale technology .
And the image of the DVD here is just to illustrate a point that silk follows very subtle topographies of the surface , which means that it can replicate features on the nanoscale .
So it would be able to replicate the information that is on the DVD .
And we can store information thats film with water and protein .
So we tried something out , and we wrote a message in a piece of silk , which is right here , and the message is over there .
And much like in the DVD , you can read it out optically .
And this requires a stable hand , so this is why I decided to do it onstage in front of a thousand people .
So let me see .
So as you see the film go in transparently through there , and then ...
And the most remarkable feat is that my hand actually stayed still long enough to do that .
So once you have these attributes of this material , then you can do a lot of things .
Its actually not limited to films .
And so the material can assume a lot of formats .
And then you go a little crazy , and so you do various optical components or you do microprism arrays , like the reflective tape that you have on your running shoes .
Or you can do beautiful things that , if the camera can capture , you can make .
You can add a third dimensionality to the film .
And if the angle is right , you can actually see a hologram appear in this film of silk .
But you can do other things .
You can imagine that then maybe you can use a pure protein to guide light , and so weve made optical fibers .
But silk is versatile and it goes beyond optics .
And you can think of different formats .
So for instance , if youre afraid of going to the doctor and getting stuck with a needle , we do microneedle arrays .
What you see there on the screen is a human hair superimposed on the needle thats made of silk  -  -  just to give you a sense of size .
You can do bigger things .
You can do gears and nuts and bolts  -  -  that you can buy at Whole Foods .
And the gears work in water as well .
So you think of alternative mechanical parts .
And maybe you can use that liquid Kevlar if you need something strong to replace peripheral veins , for example , or maybe an entire bone .
And so you have here a little example of a small skull  -  -  what we call mini Yorick .
But you can do things like cups , for example , and so , if you add a little bit of gold , if you add a little bit of semiconductors you could do sensors that stick on the surfaces of foods .
You can do electronic pieces that fold and wrap .
Or if youre fashion forward , some silk LED tattoos .
So theres versatility , as you see , in the material formats , that you can do with silk .
But there are still some unique traits .
I mean , why would you want to do all these things for real ?
I mentioned it briefly at the beginning ; the protein is biodegradable and biocompatible .
And you see here a picture of a tissue section .
And so what does that mean , that its biodegradable and biocompatible ?
You can implant it in the body without needing to retrieve what is implanted .
Which means that all the devices that youve seen before and all the formats , in principle , can be implanted and disappear .
And what you see there in that tissue section , in fact , is you see that reflector tape .
So , much like youre seen at night by a car , then the idea is that you can see , if you illuminate tissue , you can see deeper parts of tissue because there is that reflective tape there that is made out of silk .
And you see there , it gets reintegrated in tissue .
And reintegration in the human body is not the only thing , but reintegration in the environment is important .
So you have a clock , you have protein , and now a silk cup like this can be thrown away without guilt  -  -  unlike the polystyrene cups that unfortunately fill our landfills everyday .
Its edible , so you can do smart packaging around food that you can cook with the food .
It doesnt taste good , so Im going to need some help with that .
But probably the most remarkable thing is that it comes full circle .
Silk , during its self - assembly process , acts like a cocoon for biological matter .
And so if you change the recipe , and you add things when you pour  -  -  so you add things to your liquid silk solution  -  -  where these things are enzymes or antibodies or vaccines , the self - assembly process preserves the biological function of these dopants .
So it makes the materials environmentally active and interactive .
So that screw that you thought about beforehand can actually be used to screw a bone together  -  -  a fractured bone together  -  -  and deliver drugs at the same , while your bone is healing , for example .
Or you could put drugs in your wallet and not in your fridge .
So weve made a silk card with penicillin in it .
And we stored penicillin at 60 degrees C , so 140 degrees Fahrenheit , for two months without loss of efficacy of the penicillin .
And so that could be  -  -  -  that could be potentially a good alternative to solar powered refrigerated camels .
And of course , theres no use in storage if you cant use  it  .
And so there is this other unique material trait that these materials have , that theyre programmably degradable .
And so what you see there is the difference .
In the top , you have a film that has been programmed not to degrade , and in the bottom , a film that has been programmed to degrade in water .
And what you see is that the film on the bottom releases what is inside it .
So it allows for the recovery of what weve stored before .
And so this allows for a controlled delivery of drugs and for reintegration in the environment in all of these formats that youve seen .
So the thread of discovery that we have really is a thread .
Were impassioned with this idea that whatever you want to do , whether you want to replace a vein or a bone , or maybe be more sustainable in microelectronics , perhaps drink a coffee in a cup and throw it away without guilt , maybe carry your drugs in your pocket , deliver them inside your body or deliver them across the desert , the answer may be in a thread of silk .
Thank you .
Sandra Aamodt : Why dieting doesnt usually work
In the US , 80 % of girls have been on a diet by the time theyre 10 years old . In this honest , raw talk , neuroscientist Sandra Aamodt uses her personal story to frame an important lesson about how our brains manage our bodies , as she explores the science behind why dieting not only doesnt work , but is likely to do more harm than good . She suggests ideas for how to live a less diet - obsessed life , intuitively .
Three and a half years ago , I made one of the best decisions of my life .
As my New Years resolution , I gave up dieting , stopped worrying about my weight , and learned to eat mindfully .
Now I eat whenever Im hungry , and Ive lost 10 pounds .
This was me at age 13 , when I started my first diet .
I look at that picture now , and I think , you did not need a diet , you needed a fashion consult .
But I thought I needed to lose weight , and when I gained it back , of course I blamed myself .
And for the next three decades , I was on and off various diets .
No matter what I tried , the weight Id lost always came back .
Im sure many of you know the feeling .
As a neuroscientist , I wondered , why is this so hard ?
Obviously , how much you weigh depends on how much you eat and how much energy you burn .
What most people dont realize is that hunger and energy use are controlled by the brain , mostly without your awareness .
Your brain does a lot of its work behind the scenes , and that is a good thing , because your conscious mind  -  -  how do we put this politely ?  -  -  its easily distracted .
Its good that you dont have to remember to breathe when you get caught up in a movie .
You dont forget how to walk because youre thinking about what to have for dinner .
Your brain also has its own sense of what you should weigh , no matter what you consciously believe .
This is called your set point , but thats a misleading term , because its actually a range of about 10 or 15 pounds .
You can use lifestyle choices to move your weight up and down within that range , but its much , much harder to stay outside of it .
The hypothalamus , the part of the brain that regulates body weight , there are more than a dozen chemical signals in the brain that tell your body to gain weight , more than another dozen that tell your body to lose it , and the system works like a thermostat , responding to signals from the body by adjusting hunger , activity and metabolism , to keep your weight stable as conditions change .
Thats what a thermostat does , right ?
It keeps the temperature in your house the same as the weather changes outside .
Now you can try to change the temperature in your house by opening a window in the winter , but thats not going to change the setting on the thermostat , which will respond by kicking on the furnace to warm the place back up .
Your brain works exactly the same way , responding to weight loss by using powerful tools to push your body back to what it considers normal .
If you lose a lot of weight , your brain reacts as if you were starving , and whether you started out fat or thin , your brains response is exactly the same .
We would love to think that your brain could tell whether you need to lose weight or not , but it cant .
If you do lose a lot of weight , you become hungry , and your muscles burn less energy .
Dr . Rudy Leibel of Columbia University has found that people who have lost 10 percent of their body weight burn 250 to 400 calories less because their metabolism is suppressed .
Thats a lot of food .
This means that a successful dieter must eat this much less forever than someone of the same weight who has always been thin .
From an evolutionary perspective , your bodys resistance to weight loss makes sense .
When food was scarce , our ancestors survival depended on conserving energy , and regaining the weight when food was available would have protected them against the next shortage .
Over the course of human history , starvation has been a much bigger problem than overeating .
This may explain a very sad fact : Set points can go up , but they rarely go down .
Now , if your mother ever mentioned that life is not fair , this is the kind of thing she was talking about .
Successful dieting doesnt lower your set point .
Even after youve kept the weight off for as long as seven years , your brain keeps trying to make you gain it back .
If that weight loss had been due to a long famine , that would be a sensible response .
In our modern world of drive - thru burgers , its not working out so well for many of us .
That difference between our ancestral past and our abundant present is the reason that Dr . Yoni Freedhoff of the University of Ottawa would like to take some of his patients back to a time when food was less available , and its also the reason that changing the food environment is really going to be the most effective solution to obesity .
Sadly , a temporary weight gain can become permanent .
If you stay at a high weight for too long , probably a matter of years for most of us , your brain may decide that thats the new normal .
Psychologists classify eaters into two groups , those who rely on their hunger and those who try to control their eating through willpower , like most dieters .
Lets call them intuitive eaters and controlled eaters .
The interesting thing is that intuitive eaters are less likely to be overweight , and they spend less time thinking about food .
Controlled eaters are more vulnerable to overeating in response to advertising , super - sizing , and the all - you - can - eat buffet .
And a small indulgence , like eating one scoop of ice cream , is more likely to lead to a food binge in controlled eaters .
Children are especially vulnerable to this cycle of dieting and then binging .
Several long - term studies have shown that girls who diet in their early teenage years are three times more likely to become overweight five years later , even if they started at a normal weight , and all of these studies found that the same factors that predicted weight gain also predicted the development of eating disorders .
The other factor , by the way , those of you who are parents , was being teased by family members about their weight .
So dont do that .
I left almost all my graphs at home , but I couldnt resist throwing in just this one , because Im a geek , and thats how I roll .
This is a study that looked at the risk of death over a 14 - year period based on four healthy habits : eating enough fruits and vegetables , exercise three times a week , not smoking , and drinking in moderation .
Lets start by looking at the normal weight people in the study .
The height of the bars is the risk of death , and those zero , one , two , three , four numbers on the horizontal axis are the number of those healthy habits that a given person had .
And as youd expect , the healthier the lifestyle , the less likely people were to die during the study .
Now lets look at what happens in overweight people .
The ones that had no healthy habits had a higher risk of death .
Adding just one healthy habit pulls overweight people back into the normal range .
For obese people with no healthy habits , the risk is very high , seven times higher than the healthiest groups in the study .
But a healthy lifestyle helps obese people too .
In fact , if you look only at the group with all four healthy habits , you can see that weight makes very little difference .
You can take control of your health by taking control of your lifestyle , even If you cant lose weight and keep it off .
Diets dont have very much reliability .
Five years after a diet , most people have regained the weight .
Forty percent of them have gained even more .
If you think about this , the typical outcome of dieting is that youre more likely to gain weight in the long run than to lose it .
If Ive convinced you that dieting might be a problem , the next question is , what do you do about it ?
And my answer , in a word , is mindfulness .
Im not saying you need to learn to meditate or take up yoga .
Im talking about mindful eating : learning to understand your bodys signals so that you eat when youre hungry and stop when youre full , because a lot of weight gain boils down to eating when youre not hungry .
How do you do it ?
Give yourself permission to eat as much as you want , and then work on figuring out what makes your body feel good .
Sit down to regular meals without distractions .
Think about how your body feels when you start to eat and when you stop , and let your hunger decide when you should be done .
It took about a year for me to learn this , but its really been worth it .
I am so much more relaxed around food than I have ever been in my life .
I often dont think about it .
I forget we have chocolate in the house .
Its like aliens have taken over my brain .
Its just completely different .
I should say that this approach to eating probably wont make you lose weight unless you often eat when youre not hungry , but doctors dont know of any approach that makes significant weight loss in a lot of people , and that is why a lot of people are now focusing on preventing weight gain instead of promoting weight loss .
Lets face it : If diets worked , wed all be thin already .
Why do we keep doing the same thing and expecting different results ?
Diets may seem harmless , but they actually do a lot of collateral damage .
At worst , they ruin lives : Weight obsession leads to eating disorders , especially in young kids .
In the U.S . , we have 80 percent of 10 - year - old girls say theyve been on a diet .
Our daughters have learned to measure their worth by the wrong scale .
Even at its best , dieting is a waste of time and energy .
It takes willpower which you could be using to help your kids with their homework or to finish that important work project , and because willpower is limited , any strategy that relies on its consistent application is pretty much guaranteed to eventually fail you when your attention moves on to something else .
Let me leave you with one last thought .
What if we told all those dieting girls that its okay to eat when theyre hungry ?
What if we taught them to work with their appetite instead of fearing it ?
I think most of them would be happier and healthier , and as adults , many of them would probably be thinner .
I wish someone had told me that back when I was 13 .
Thanks .
Lee Cronin : Print your own medicine
Chemist Lee Cronin is working on a 3D printer that , instead of objects , is able to print molecules . An exciting potential long - term application : printing your own medicine using chemical inks .
Organic chemists make molecules , very complicated molecules , by chopping up a big molecule into small molecules and reverse engineering .
And as a chemist , one of the things I wanted to ask my research group a couple of years ago is , could we make a really cool universal chemistry set ?
In essence , could we  app  chemistry ?
Now what would this mean , and how would we do it ?
Well to start to do this , we took a 3D printer and we started to print our beakers and our test tubes on one side and then print the molecule at the same time on the other side and combine them together in what we call reactionware .
And so by printing the vessel and doing the chemistry at the same time , we may start to access this universal toolkit of chemistry .
Now what could this mean ?
Well if we can embed biological and chemical networks like a search engine , so if you have a cell thats ill that you need to cure or bacteria that you want to kill , if you have this embedded in your device at the same time , and you do the chemistry , you may be able to make drugs in a new way .
So how are we doing this in the lab ?
Well it requires software , it requires hardware and it requires chemical inks .
And so the really cool bit is , the idea is that we want to have a universal set of inks that we put out with the printer , and you download the blueprint , the organic chemistry for that molecule and you make it in the device .
And so you can make your molecule in the printer using this software .
So what could this mean ?
Well , ultimately , it could mean that you could print your own medicine .
And this is what were doing in the lab at the moment .
But to take baby steps to get there , first of all we want to look at drug design and production , or drug discovery and manufacturing .
Because if we can manufacture it after weve discovered it , we could deploy it anywhere .
You dont need to go to the chemist anymore .
We can print drugs at point of need .
We can download new diagnostics .
Say a new super bug has emerged .
You put it in your search engine , and you create the drug to treat the threat .
So this allows you on - the - fly molecular assembly .
But perhaps for me the core bit going into the future is this idea of taking your own stem cells , with your genes and your environment , and you print your own personal medicine .
And if that doesnt seem fanciful enough , where do you think were going to go ?
Well , youre going to have your own personal matter fabricator .
Beam me up , Scotty .
Eli Pariser : Beware online  filter bubbles 
As web companies strive to tailor their services to our personal tastes , theres a dangerous unintended consequence : We get trapped in a  filter bubble  and dont get exposed to information that could challenge or broaden our worldview . Eli Pariser argues powerfully that this will ultimately prove to be bad for us and bad for democracy .
Mark Zuckerberg , a journalist was asking him a question about the news feed .
And the journalist was asking him ,  Why is this so important ? 
And Zuckerberg said ,  A squirrel dying in your front yard may be more relevant to your interests right now than people dying in Africa . 
And I want to talk about what a Web based on that idea of relevance might look like .
So when I was growing up in a really rural area in Maine , the Internet meant something very different to me .
It meant a connection to the world .
It meant something that would connect us all together .
And I was sure that it was going to be great for democracy and for our society .
But theres this shift in how information is flowing online , and its invisible .
And if we dont pay attention to it , it could be a real problem .
So I first noticed this in a place I spend a lot of time  -  -  my Facebook page .
Im progressive , politically  -  -  big surprise  -  -  but Ive always gone out of my way to meet conservatives .
I like hearing what theyre thinking about ; I like seeing what they link to ; I like learning a thing or two .
And so I was surprised when I noticed one day that the conservatives had disappeared from my Facebook feed .
was that Facebook was looking at which links I clicked on , and it was noticing that , actually , I was clicking more on my liberal friends links than on my conservative friends links .
And without consulting me about it , it had edited them out .
They disappeared .
So Facebook isnt the only place thats doing this kind of invisible , algorithmic editing of the Web .
Googles doing it too .
If I search for something , and you search for something , even right now at the very same time , we may get very different search results .
Even if youre logged out , one engineer told me , there are 57 signals that Google looks at  -  -  everything from what kind of computer youre on to what kind of browser youre using to where youre located  -  -  that it uses to personally tailor your query results .
Think about it for a second : there is no standard Google anymore .
And you know , the funny thing about this is that its hard to see .
You cant see how different your search results are from anyone elses .
But a couple of weeks ago , I asked a bunch of friends to Google  Egypt  and to send me screen shots of what they got .
So heres my friend Scotts screen shot .
And heres my friend Daniels screen shot .
When you put them side - by - side , you dont even have to read the links to see how different these two pages are .
But when you do read the links , its really quite remarkable .
Daniel didnt get anything about the protests in Egypt at all in his first page of Google results .
Scotts results were full of them .
And this was the big story of the day at that time .
Thats how different these results are becoming .
So its not just Google and Facebook either .
This is something thats sweeping the Web .
There are a whole host of companies that are doing this kind of personalization .
Yahoo News , the biggest news site on the Internet , is now personalized  -  -  different people get different things .
Huffington Post , the Washington Post , the New York Times  -  -  all flirting with personalization in various ways .
And this moves us very quickly toward a world in which the Internet is showing us what it thinks we want to see , but not necessarily what we need to see .
As Eric Schmidt said ,  It will be very hard for people to watch or consume something that has not in some sense been tailored for them . 
So I do think this is a problem .
And I think , if you take all of these filters together , you take all these algorithms , you get what I call a filter bubble .
And your filter bubble is your own personal , unique universe of information that you live in online .
And whats in your filter bubble depends on who you are , and it depends on what you do .
But the thing is that you dont decide what gets in .
And more importantly , you dont actually see what gets edited out .
So one of the problems with the filter bubble was discovered by some researchers at Netflix .
And they were looking at the Netflix queues , and they noticed something kind of funny that a lot of us probably have noticed , which is there are some movies that just sort of zip right up and out to our houses .
They enter the queue , they just zip right out .
So  Iron Man  zips right out , and  Waiting for Superman  can wait for a really long time .
What they discovered was that in our Netflix queues theres this epic struggle going on between our future aspirational selves and our more impulsive present selves .
You know we all want to be someone who has watched  Rashomon ,  but right now we want to watch  Ace Ventura  for the fourth time .
So the best editing gives us a bit of both .
It gives us a little bit of Justin Bieber and a little bit of Afghanistan .
It gives us some information vegetables ; it gives us some information dessert .
And the challenge with these kinds of algorithmic filters , these personalized filters , is that , because theyre mainly looking at what you click on first , it can throw off that balance .
And instead of a balanced information diet , you can end up surrounded by information junk food .
What this suggests is actually that we may have the story about the Internet wrong .
In a broadcast society  -  -  this is how the founding mythology goes  -  -  in a broadcast society , there were these gatekeepers , the editors , and they controlled the flows of information .
And along came the Internet and it swept them out of the way , and it allowed all of us to connect together , and it was awesome .
But thats not actually whats happening right now .
What were seeing is more of a passing of the torch from human gatekeepers to algorithmic ones .
And the thing is that the algorithms dont yet have the kind of embedded ethics that the editors did .
So if algorithms are going to curate the world for us , if theyre going to decide what we get to see and what we dont get to see , then we need to make sure that theyre not just keyed to relevance .
We need to make sure that they also show us things that are uncomfortable or challenging or important  -  -  this is what TED does  -  -  other points of view .
And the thing is , weve actually been here before as a society .
In 1915 , its not like newspapers were sweating a lot about their civic responsibilities .
Then people noticed that they were doing something really important .
That , in fact , you couldnt have a functioning democracy if citizens didnt get a good flow of information , that the newspapers were critical because they were acting as the filter , and then journalistic ethics developed .
It wasnt perfect , but it got us through the last century .
And so now , were kind of back in 1915 on the Web .
And we need the new gatekeepers to encode that kind of responsibility into the code that theyre writing .
I know that there are a lot of people here from Facebook and from Google  -  -  Larry and Sergey  -  -  people who have helped build the Web as it is , and Im grateful for that .
But we really need you to make sure that these algorithms have encoded in them a sense of the public life , a sense of civic responsibility .
We need you to make sure that theyre transparent enough that we can see what the rules are that determine what gets through our filters .
And we need you to give us some control so that we can decide what gets through and what doesnt .
Because I think we really need the Internet to be that thing that we all dreamed of it being .
We need it to connect us all together .
We need it to introduce us to new ideas and new people and different perspectives .
And its not going to do that if it leaves us all isolated in a Web of one .
Thank you .
Alan Russell : The potential of regenerative medicine
Alan Russell studies regenerative medicine  -  -  a breakthrough way of thinking about disease and injury , using a process that can signal the body to rebuild itself .
Im going to talk to you today about hopefully converting fear into hope .
When we go to the physician today  -  -  when we go to the doctors office and we walk in , there are words that we just dont want to hear .
There are words that were truly afraid of .
Diabetes , cancer , Parkinsons , Alzheimers , heart failure , lung failure  -  -  things that we know are debilitating diseases , for which theres relatively little that can be done .
And what I want to lay out for you today is a different way of thinking about how to treat debilitating disease , why its important , why without it perhaps our health care system will melt down if you think it already hasnt , and where we are clinically today , and where we might go tomorrow , and what some of the hurdles are .
And were going to do all of that in 18 minutes , I promise .
I want to start with this slide , because this slide sort of tells the story the way Science Magazine thinks of it .
This was an issue from 2002 that they published with a lot of different articles on the bionic human .
It was basically a regenerative medicine issue .
Regenerative medicine is an extraordinarily simple concept that everybody can understand .
Its simply accelerating the pace at which the body heals itself to a clinically relevant timescale .
So we know how to do this in many of the ways that are up there .
We know that if we have a damaged hip , you can put an artificial hip in .
And this is the idea that Science Magazine used on their front cover .
This is the complete antithesis of regenerative medicine .
This is not regenerative medicine .
Regenerative medicine is what Business Week put up when they did a story about regenerative medicine not too long ago .
The idea is that instead of figuring out how to ameliorate symptoms with devices and drugs and the like  -  -  and Ill come back to that theme a few times  -  -  instead of doing that , we will regenerate lost function of the body by regenerating the function of organs and damaged tissue .
So that at the end of the treatment , you are the same as you were at the beginning of the treatment .
Very few good ideas  -  -  if you agree that this is a good idea  -  -  very few good ideas are truly novel .
And this is just the same .
If you look back in history , Charles Lindbergh , who was better known for flying airplanes , was actually one of the first people along with Alexis Carrel , one of the Nobel Laureates from Rockefeller , to begin to think about , could you culture organs ?
And they published this book in 1937 , where they actually began to think about , what could you do in bio - reactors to grow whole organs ?
Weve come a long way since then .
Im going to share with you some of the exciting work thats going on .
But before doing that , what Id like to do is share my depression about the health care system and the need for this with you .
Many of the talks yesterday talked about improving the quality of life , and reducing poverty , and essentially increasing life expectancy all around the globe .
One of the challenges is that the richer we are , the longer we live .
And the longer we live , the more expensive it is to take care of our diseases as we get older .
This is simply the wealth of a country versus the percent of population over the age of 65 .
And you can basically see that the richer a country is , the older the people are within it .
Why is this important ?
And why is this a particularly dramatic challenge right now ?
If the average age of your population is 30 , then the average kind of disease that you have to treat is maybe a broken ankle every now and again , maybe a little bit of asthma .
If the average age in your country is 45 to 55 , now the average person is looking at diabetes , early - onset diabetes , heart failure , coronary artery disease  -  -  things that are inherently more difficult to treat , and much more expensive to treat .
Just have a look at the demographics in the U.S . here .
This is from  The Untied States of America . 
In 1930 , there were 41 workers per retiree .
41 people who were basically outside of being really sick , paying for the one retiree who was experiencing debilitating disease .
In 2010 , two workers per retiree in the U.S .
And this is matched in every industrialized , wealthy country in the world .
How can you actually afford to treat patients when the reality of getting old looks like this ?
This is age versus cost of health care .
And you can see that right around age 45 , 40 to 45 , theres a sudden spike in the cost of health care .
Its actually quite interesting . If you do the right studies , you can look at how much you as an individual spend on your own health care , plotted over your lifetime .
And about seven years before youre about to die , theres a spike .
And you can actually  -  -   -  -  we wont get into that .
There are very few things , very few things that you can really do that will change the way that you can treat these kinds of diseases and experience what I would call healthy aging .
Id suggest there are four things , and none of these things include an insurance system or a legal system .
All those things do is change who pays .
They dont actually change what the actual cost of the treatment is .
One thing you can do is not treat . You can ration health care .
We wont talk about that anymore . Its too depressing .
You can prevent .
Obviously a lot of monies should be put into prevention .
But perhaps most interesting , to me anyway , and most important , is the idea of diagnosing a disease much earlier on in the progression , and then treating the disease to cure the disease instead of treating a symptom .
Think of it in terms of diabetes , for instance .
Today , with diabetes , what do we do ?
We diagnose the disease eventually , once it becomes symptomatic , and then we treat the symptom for 10 , 20 , 30 , 40 years .
And we do OK . Insulins a pretty good therapy .
But eventually it stops working , and diabetes leads to a predictable onset of debilitating disease .
Why couldnt we just inject the pancreas with something to regenerate the pancreas early on in the disease , perhaps even before it was symptomatic ?
And it might be a little bit expensive at the time that we did it , but if it worked , we would truly be able to do something different .
This video , I think , gets across the concept that Im talking about quite dramatically .
This is a newt re - growing its limb .
If a newt can do this kind of thing , why cant we ?
Ill actually show you some more important features about limb regeneration in a moment .
But what were talking about in regenerative medicine is doing this in every organ system of the body , for tissues and for organs themselves .
So todays reality is that if we get sick , the message is we will treat your symptoms , and you need to adjust to a new way of life .
I would pose to you that tomorrow  -  -  and when tomorrow is we could debate , but its within the foreseeable future  -  -  we will talk about regenerative rehabilitation .
Theres a limb prosthetic up here , similar actually one on the soldier thats come back from Iraq .
There are 370 soldiers that have come back from Iraq that have lost limbs .
Imagine if instead of facing that , they could actually face the regeneration of that limb .
Its a wild concept .
Ill show you where we are at the moment in working towards that concept .
But its applicable , again , to every organ system .
How can we do that ?
The way to do that is to develop a conversation with the body .
We need to learn to speak the bodys language .
And to switch on processes that we knew how to do when we were a fetus .
A mammalian fetus , if it loses a limb during the first trimester of pregnancy , will re - grow that limb .
So our DNA has the capacity to do these kinds of wound - healing mechanisms .
Its a natural process , but it is lost as we age .
In a child , before the age of about six months , if they lose their fingertip in an accident , theyll re - grow their fingertip .
By the time theyre five , they wont be able to do that anymore .
So to engage in that conversation with the body , we need to speak the bodys language .
And there are certain tools in our toolbox that allow us to do this today .
Im going to give you an example of three of these tools through which to converse with the body .
The first is cellular therapies .
Clearly , we heal ourselves in a natural process , using cells to do most of the work .
Therefore , if we can find the right cells and implant them in the body , they may do the healing .
Secondly , we can use materials .
We heard yesterday about the importance of new materials .
If we can invent materials , design materials , or extract materials from a natural environment , then we might be able to have those materials induce the body to heal itself .
And finally , we may be able to use smart devices that will offload the work of the body and allow it to heal .
Im going to show you an example of each of these , and Im going to start with materials .
Steve Badylak  -  -  whos at the University of Pittsburgh  -  -  about a decade ago had a remarkable idea .
And that idea was that the small intestine of a pig , if you threw away all the cells , and if you did that in a way that allowed it to remain biologically active , may contain all of the necessary factors and signals that would signal the body to heal itself .
And he asked a very important question .
He asked the question , if I take that material , which is a natural material that usually induces healing in the small intestine , and I place it somewhere else on a persons body , would it give a tissue - specific response , or would it make small intestine if I tried to make a new ear ?
I wouldnt be telling you this story if it werent compelling .
The picture Im about to show you is a compelling picture .
However , for those of you that are even the slightest bit squeamish  -  -  even though you may not like to admit it in front of your friends  -  -  the lights are down . This is a good time to look at your feet , check your Blackberry , do anything other than look at the screen .
What Im about to show you is a diabetic ulcer .
And although  -  -  its good to laugh before we look at this .
This is the reality of diabetes .
I think a lot of times we hear about diabetics , diabetic ulcers , we just dont connect the ulcer with the eventual treatment , which is amputation , if you cant heal it .
So Im going to put the slide up now . It wont be up for long .
This is a diabetic ulcer . Its tragic .
The treatment for this is amputation .
This is an older lady . She has cancer of the liver as well as diabetes , and has decided to die with what s left of her body intact .
And this lady decided , after a year of attempted treatment of that ulcer , that she would try this new therapy that Steve invented .
Thats what the wound looked like 11 weeks later .
That material contained only natural signals .
And that material induced the body to switch back on a healing response that it didnt have before .
Theres going to be a couple more distressing slides for those of you  -  -  Ill let you know when you can look again .
This is a horse . The horse is not in pain .
If the horse was in pain , I wouldnt show you this slide .
The horse just has another nostril thats developed because of a riding accident .
Just a few weeks after treatment  -  -  in this case , taking that material , turning it into a gel , and packing that area , and then repeating the treatment a few times  -  -  and the horse heals up .
And if you took an ultrasound of that area , it would look great .
Heres a dolphin where the fins been re - attached .
There are now 400,000 patients around the world who have used that material to heal their wounds .
Could you regenerate a limb ?
DARPA just gave Steve 15 million dollars to lead an eight - institution project to begin the process of asking that question .
And Ill show you the 15 million dollar picture .
This is a 78 year - old man whos lost the end of his fingertip .
Remember that I mentioned before the children who lose their fingertips .
After treatment thats what it looks like .
This is happening today .
This is clinically relevant today .
There are materials that do this . Here are the heart patches .
But could you go a little further ?
Could you , say , instead of using material , can I take some cells along with the material , and remove a damaged piece of tissue , put a bio - degradable material on there ?
You can see here a little bit of heart muscle beating in a dish .
This was done by Teruo Okano at Tokyo Womens Hospital .
He can actually grow beating tissue in a dish .
He chills the dish , it changes its properties and he peels it right out of the dish .
Its the coolest stuff .
Now Im going to show you cell - based regeneration .
And what Im going to show you here is stem cells being removed from the hip of a patient .
Again , if youre squeamish , you dont want to watch .
But this ones kind of cool .
So this is a bypass operation , just like what Al Gore had , with a difference .
In this case , at the end of the bypass operation , youre going to see the stem cells from the patient that were removed at the beginning of the procedure being injected directly into the heart of the patient .
And Im standing up here because at one point Im going to show you just how early this technology is .
Here go the stem cells , right into the beating heart of the patient .
And if you look really carefully , its going to be right around this point youll actually see a back - flush .
You see the cells coming back out .
We need all sorts of new technology , new devices , to get the cells to the right place at the right time .
Just a little bit of data , a tiny bit of data .
This was a randomized trial .
At this time this was an N of 20 . Now theres an N of about 100 .
Basically , if you take an extremely sick patient and you give them a bypass , they get a little bit better .
If you give them stem cells as well as their bypass , for these particular patients , they became asymptomatic .
These are now two years out .
The coolest thing would be is if you could diagnose the disease early , and prevent the onset of the disease to a bad state .
This is the same procedure , but now done minimally invasively , with only three holes in the body where theyre taking the heart and simply injecting stem cells through a laparoscopic procedure .
There go the cells .
We dont have time to go into all of those details , but basically , that works too .
You can take patients who are less sick , and bring them back to an almost asymptomatic state through that kind of therapy .
Heres another example of stem - cell therapy that isnt quite clinical yet , but I think very soon will be .
This is the work of Kacey Marra from Pittsburgh , along with a number of colleagues around the world .
Theyve decided that liposuction fluid , which  -  -  in the United States , we have a lot of liposuction fluid .
Its a great source of stem cells .
Stem cells are packed in that liposuction fluid .
So you could go in , you could get your tummy - tuck .
Out comes the liposuction fluid , and in this case , the stem cells are isolated and turned into neurons .
All done in the lab .
And I think fairly soon , you will see patients being treated with their own fat - derived , or adipose - derived , stem cells .
I talked before about the use of devices to dramatically change the way we treat disease .
Heres just one example before I close up .
This is equally tragic .
We have a very abiding and heartbreaking partnership with our colleagues at the Institute for Surgical Research in the US Army , who have to treat the now 11,000 kids that have come back from Iraq .
Many of those patients are very severely burned .
And if theres anything thats been learned about burn , its that we dont know how to treat it .
Everything that is done to treat burn  -  -  basically we do a sodding approach .
We make something over here , and then we transplant it onto the site of the wound , and we try and get the two to take .
In this case here , a new , wearable bio - reactor has been designed  -  -  it should be tested clinically later this year at ISR  -  -  by Joerg Gerlach in Pittsburgh .
And that bio - reactor will lay down in the wound bed .
The gun that you see there sprays cells .
Thats going to spray cells over that area .
The reactor will serve to fertilize the environment , deliver other things as well at the same time , and therefore we will seed that lawn , as opposed to try the sodding approach .
Its a completely different way of doing it .
So my 18 minutes is up .
So let me finish up with some good news , and maybe a little bit of bad news .
The good news is that this is happening today .
Its very powerful work .
Clearly the images kind of get that across .
Its incredibly difficult because its highly inter - disciplinary .
Almost every field of science engineering and clinical practice is involved in trying to get this to happen .
A number of governments , and a number of regions , have recognized that this is a new way to treat disease .
The Japanese government were perhaps the first , when they decided to invest first 3 billion , later another 2 billion in this field .
Its no coincidence .
Japan is the oldest country on earth in terms of its average age .
They need this to work or their health system dies .
So theyre putting a lot of strategic investment focused in this area .
The European Union , same thing .
China , the same thing .
China just launched a national tissue - engineering center .
The first year budget was 250 million US dollars .
In the United States weve had a somewhat different approach .
Oh , for Al Gore to come and be in the real world as president .
Weve had a different approach .
And the approach has basically been to just sort of fund things as they come along .
But theres been no strategic investment to bring all of the necessary things to bear and focus them in a careful way .
And Im going to finish up with a quote , maybe a little cheap shot , at the director of the NIH , whos a very charming man .
Myself and Jay Vacanti from Harvard went to visit with him and a number of his directors of his institute just a few months ago , to try and convince him that it was time to take just a little piece of that 27.5 billion dollars that hes going to get next year and focus it , in a strategic way , to make sure we can accelerate the pace at which these things get to patients .
And at the end of a very testy meeting , what the NIH director said was ,  Your vision is larger than our appetite . 
Id like to close by saying that no ones going to change our vision , but together we can change his appetite .
Thank you .
Terry Moore : Why is x the unknown ?
Why is x the symbol for an unknown ? In this short and funny talk , Terry Moore gives the surprising answer .
I have the answer to a question that weve all asked .
The question is , Why is it that the letter X represents the unknown ?
Now I know we learned that in math class , but now its everywhere in the culture  -  -  The X prize , the X - Files , Project X , TEDx .
Whered that come from ?
About six years ago I decided that I would learn Arabic , which turns out to be a supremely logical language .
To write a word or a phrase or a sentence in Arabic is like crafting an equation , because every part is extremely precise and carries a lot of information .
Thats one of the reasons so much of what weve come to think of as Western science and mathematics and engineering was really worked out in the first few centuries of the Common Era by the Persians and the Arabs and the Turks .
This includes the little system in Arabic called al - jebra .
And al - jebr roughly translates to  the system for reconciling disparate parts . 
Al - jebr finally came into English as algebra .
One example among many .
The Arabic texts containing this mathematical wisdom finally made their way to Europe  -  -  which is to say Spain  -  -  in the 11th and 12th centuries .
And when they arrived there was tremendous interest in translating this wisdom into a European language .
But there were problems .
One problem is there are some sounds in Arabic that just dont make it through a European voice box without lots of practice .
Trust me on that one .
Also , those very sounds tend not to be represented by the characters that are available in European languages .
Heres one of the culprits .
This is the letter SHeen , and it makes the sound we think of as SH  -  -   sh . 
Its also the very first letter of the word shalan , which means  something  just like the the English word  something   -  -  some undefined , unknown thing .
Now in Arabic , we can make this definite by adding the definite article  al . 
So this is al - shalan  -  -  the unknown thing .
And this is a word that appears throughout early mathematics , such as this 10th century derivation of proofs .
The problem for the Medieval Spanish scholars who were tasked with translating this material is that the letter SHeen and the word shalan cant be rendered into Spanish because Spanish doesnt have that SH , that  sh  sound .
So by convention , they created a rule in which they borrowed the CK sound ,  ck  sound , from the classical Greek in the form of the letter Kai .
Later when this material was translated into a common European language , which is to say Latin , they simply replaced the Greek Kai with the Latin X .
And once that happened , once this material was in Latin , it formed the basis for mathematics textbooks for almost 600 years .
But now we have the answer to our question .
Why is it that X is the unknown ?
X is the unknown because you cant say  sh  in Spanish .
And I thought that was worth sharing .
Mike Biddle : We can recycle plastic
Less than 10 % of plastic trash is recycled  -  -  compared to almost 90 % of metals  -  -  because of the massively complicated problem of finding and sorting the different kinds . Frustrated by this waste , Mike Biddle has developed a cheap and incredibly energy efficient plant that can , and does , recycle any kind of plastic .
Im a garbage man .
And you might find it interesting that I became a garbage man , because I absolutely hate waste .
I hope , within the next 10 minutes , to change the way you think about a lot of the stuff in your life .
And Id like to start at the very beginning .
Think back when you were just a kid .
How did look at the stuff in your life ?
Perhaps it was like these toddler rules : Its my stuff if I saw it first .
The entire pile is my stuff if Im building something .
The more stuff thats mine , the better .
And of course , its your stuff if its broken .
Well after spending about 20 years in the recycling industry , its become pretty clear to me that we dont necessarily leave these toddler rules behind as we develop into adults .
And let me tell you why I have that perspective .
Because each and every day at our recycling plants around the world we handle about one million pounds of peoples discarded stuff .
Now a million pounds a day sounds like a lot of stuff , but its a tiny drop of the durable goods that are disposed each and every year around the world  -  -  well less than one percent .
In fact , the United Nations estimates that theres about 85 billion pounds a year of electronics waste that gets discarded around the world each and every year  -  -  and thats one of the most rapidly growing parts of our waste stream .
And if you throw in other durable goods like automobiles and so forth , that number well more than doubles .
And of course , the more developed the country , the bigger these mountains .
Now when you see these mountains , most people think of garbage .
We see above - ground mines .
And the reason we see mines is because theres a lot of valuable raw materials that went into making all of this stuff in the first place .
And its becoming increasingly important that we figure out how to extract these raw materials from these extremely complicated waste streams .
Because as weve heard all week at TED , the worlds getting to be a smaller place with more people in it who want more and more stuff .
And of course , they want the toys and the tools that many of us take for granted .
And what goes into making those toys and tools that we use every single day ?
Its mostly many types of plastics and many types of metals .
And the metals , we typically get from ore that we mine in ever widening mines and ever deepening mines around the world .
And the plastics , we get from oil , which we go to more remote locations and drill ever deeper wells to extract .
And these practices have significant economic and environmental implications that were already starting to see today .
The good news is we are starting to recover materials from our end - of - life stuff and starting to recycle our end - of - life stuff , particularly in regions of the world like here in Europe that have recycling policies in place that require that this stuff be recycled in a responsible manner .
Most of whats extracted from our end - of - life stuff , if it makes it to a recycler , are the metals .
To put that in perspective  -  -  and Im using steel as a proxy here for metals , because its the most common metal  -  -  if your stuff makes it to a recycler , probably over 90 percent of the metals are going to be recovered and reused for another purpose .
Plastics are a whole other story : well less than 10 percent are recovered .
In fact , its more like five percent .
Most of its incinerated or landfilled .
Now most people think thats because plastics are a throw - away material , have very little value .
But actually , plastics are several times more valuable than steel .
And theres more plastics produced and consumed around the world on a volume basis every year than steel .
So why is such a plentiful and valuable material not recovered at anywhere near the rate of the less valuable material ?
Well its predominantly because metals are very easy to recycle from other materials and from one another .
They have very different densities .
They have different electrical and magnetic properties .
And they even have different colors .
So its very easy for either humans or machines to separate these metals from one another and from other materials .
Plastics have overlapping densities over a very narrow range .
They have either identical or very similar electrical and magnetic properties .
And any plastic can be any color , as you probably well know .
So the traditional ways of separating materials just simply dont work for plastics .
Another consequence of metals being so easy to recycle by humans is that a lot of our stuff from the developed world  -  -  and sadly to say , particularly from the United States , where we dont have any recycling policies in place like here in Europe  -  -  finds its way to developing countries for low - cost recycling .
People , for as little as a dollar a day , pick through our stuff .
They extract what they can , which is mostly the metals  -  -  circuit boards and so forth  -  -  and they leave behind mostly what they cant recover , which is , again , mostly the plastics .
Or they burn the plastics to get to the metals in burn houses like you see here .
And they extract the metals by hand .
Now while this may be the low - economic - cost solution , this is certainly not the low - environmental or human health - and - safety solution .
I call this environmental arbitrage .
And its not fair , its not safe and its not sustainable .
Now because the plastics are so plentiful  -  -  and by the way , those other methods dont lead to the recovery of plastics , obviously  -  -  but people do try to recover the plastics .
This is just one example .
This is a photo I took standing on the rooftops of one of the largest slums in the world in Mumbai , India .
They store the plastics on the roofs .
They bring them below those roofs into small workshops like these , and people try very hard to separate the plastics , by color , by shape , by feel , by any technique they can .
And sometimes theyll resort to whats known as the  burn and sniff  technique where theyll burn the plastic and smell the fumes to try to determine the type of plastic .
None of these techniques result in any amount of recycling in any significant way .
And by the way , please dont try this technique at home .
So what are we to do about this space - age material , at least what we used to call a space - aged material , these plastics ?
Well I certainly believe that its far too valuable and far too abundant to keep putting back in the ground or certainly send up in smoke .
So about 20 years ago , I literally started in my garage tinkering around , trying to figure out how to separate these very similar materials from each other , and eventually enlisted a lot of my friends , in the mining world actually , and in the plastics world , and we started going around to mining laboratories around the world .
Because after all , were doing above - ground mining .
And we eventually broke the code .
This is the last frontier of recycling .
Its the last major material to be recovered in any significant amount on the Earth .
And we finally figured out how to do it .
And in the process , we started recreating how the plastics industry makes plastics .
The traditional way to make plastics is with oil or petrochemicals .
You breakdown the molecules , you recombine them in very specific ways , to make all the wonderful plastics that we enjoy each and every day .
We said , theres got to be a more sustainable way to make plastics .
And not just sustainable from an environmental standpoint , sustainable from an economic standpoint as well .
Well a good place to start is with waste .
It certainly doesnt cost as much as oil , and its plentiful , as I hope that youve been able to see from the photographs .
And because were not breaking down the plastic into molecules and recombining them , were using a mining approach to extract the materials .
We have significantly lower capital costs in our plant equipment .
We have enormous energy savings .
I dont know how many other projects on the planet right now can save 80 to 90 percent of the energy compared to making something the traditional way .
And instead of plopping down several hundred million dollars to build a chemical plant that will only make one type of plastic for its entire life , our plants can make any type of plastic we feed them .
And we make a drop - in replacement for that plastic thats made from petrochemicals .
Our customers get to enjoy huge CO2 savings .
They get to close the loop with their products .
And they get to make more sustainable products .
In the short time period I have , I want to show you a little bit of a sense about how we do this .
It starts with metal recyclers who shred our stuff into very small bits .
They recover the metals and leave behind whats called shredder residue  -  -  its their waste  -  -  a very complex mixture of materials , but predominantly plastics .
We take out the things that arent plastics , such as the metals they missed , carpeting , foam , rubber , wood , glass , paper , you name it .
Even an occasional dead animal , unfortunately .
And it goes in the first part of our process here , which is more like traditional recycling .
Were sieving the material , were using magnets , were using air classification .
It looks like the Willy Wonka factory at this point .
At the end of this process , we have a mixed plastic composite : many different types of plastics and many different grades of plastics .
This goes into the more sophisticated part of our process , and the really hard work , multi - step separation process begins .
We grind the plastic down to about the size of your small fingernail .
We use a very highly automated process to sort those plastics , not only by type , but by grade .
And out the end of that part of the process come little flakes of plastic : one type , one grade .
We then use optical sorting to color sort this material .
We blend it in 50,000 - lb . blending silos .
We push that material to extruders where we melt it , push it through small die holes , make spaghetti - like plastic strands .
And we chop those strands into what are called pellets .
And this becomes the currency of the plastics industry .
This is the same material that you would get from oil .
And today , were producing it from your old stuff , and its going right back into your new stuff .
So now , instead of your stuff ending up on a hillside in a developing country or literally going up in smoke , you can find your old stuff back on top of your desk in new products , in your office , or back at work in your home .
And these are just a few examples of companies that are buying our plastic , replacing virgin plastic , to make their new products .
So I hope Ive changed the way you look at at least some of the stuff in your life .
We took our clues from mother nature .
Mother nature wastes very little , reuses practically everything .
And I hope that you stop looking at yourself as a consumer  -  -  thats a label Ive always hated my entire life  -  -  and think of yourself as just using resources in one form , until they can be transformed to another form for another use later in time .
And finally , I hope you agree with me to change that last toddler rule just a little bit to :  If its broken , its my stuff . 
Thank you for your time .
Lalitesh Katragadda : Making maps to fight disaster , build economies
As of 2005 , only 15 percent of the world was mapped . This slows the delivery of aid after a disaster  -  -  and hides the economic potential of unused lands and unknown roads . In this short talk , Googles Lalitesh Katragadda demos Map Maker , a group map - making tool that people around the globe are using to map their world .
In 2008 , Cyclone Nargis devastated Myanmar .
Millions of people were in severe need of help .
The U.N . wanted to rush people and supplies to the area .
But there were no maps , no maps of roads , no maps showing hospitals , no way for help to reach the cyclone victims .
When we look at a map of Los Angeles or London , it is hard to believe that as of 2005 , only 15 percent of the world was mapped to a geo - codable level of detail .
The U.N . ran headfirst into a problem that the majority of the worlds populous faces : not having detailed maps .
But help was coming .
At Google , 40 volunteers used a new software to map 120,000 kilometers of roads , 3,000 hospitals , logistics and relief points .
And it took them four days .
The new software they used ? Google Mapmaker .
Google Mapmaker is a technology that empowers each of us to map what we know locally .
People have used this software to map everything from roads to rivers , from schools to local businesses , and video stores to the corner store .
Maps matter .
Nobel Prize nominee Hernando De Soto recognized that the key to economic liftoff for most developing countries is to tap the vast amounts of uncapitalized land .
For example , a trillion dollars of real estate remains uncapitalized in India alone .
In the last year alone , thousands of users in 170 countries have mapped millions of pieces of information , and created a map of a level of detail never thought viable .
And this was made possible by the power of passionate users everywhere .
Lets look at some of the maps being created by users right now .
So , as we speak , people are mapping the world in these 170 countries .
You can see Bridget in Africa who just mapped a road in Senegal .
And , closer to home , Chalua , an N.G . road in Bangalore .
This is the result of computational geometry , gesture recognition , and machine learning .
This is a victory of thousands of users , in hundreds of cities , one user , one edit at a time .
This is an invitation to the 70 percent of our unmapped planet .
Welcome to the new world .
Nathan Myhrvold : Cooking as never seen before
Cookbook author Nathan Myhrvold talks about his magisterial work ,  Modernist Cuisine   -  -  and shares the secret of its cool photographic illustrations , which show cross - sections of food in the very act of being cooked .
So Im going to tell you a little bit about reimagining food .
Ive been interested in food for a long time .
I taught myself to cook with a bunch of big books like this .
I went to chef school in France .
And there is a way the world both envisions food , the way the world writes about food and learns about food .
And its largely what you would find in these books .
And its a wonderful thing .
But theres some things that have been going on since this idea of food was established .
In the last 20 years , people have realized that science has a tremendous amount to do with food .
In fact , understanding why cooking works requires knowing the science of cooking  -  -  some of the chemistry , some of the physics and so forth .
But thats not in any of those books .
Theres also a tremendous number of techniques that chefs have developed , some about new aesthetics , new approaches to food .
Theres a chef in Spain named Ferran Adria .
Hes developed a very avant - garde cuisine .
A guy in England called Heston Blumenthal , hes developed his avant - garde cuisine .
None of the techniques that these people have developed over the course of the last 20 years is in any of those books .
None of them are taught in cooking schools .
In order to learn them , you have to go work in those restaurants .
And finally , theres the old way of viewing food is the old way .
And so a few years ago  -  -  fours years ago , actually  -  -  I set out to say , is there a way we can communicate science and technique and wonder ?
Is there a way we can show people food in a way they have not seen it before ?
So we tried , and Ill show you what we came up with .
This is a picture called a cutaway .
This is actually the first picture I took in the book .
The idea here is to explain what happens when you steam broccoli .
And this magic view allows you to see all of whats happening while the broccoli steams .
Then each of the different little pieces around it explain some fact .
And the hope was two - fold .
One is you can actually explain what happens when you steam broccoli .
But the other thing is that maybe we could seduce people into stuff that was a little more technical , maybe a little bit more scientific , maybe a little bit more chef - y than they otherwise would have .
Because with that beautiful photo , maybe I can also package this little box here that talks about how steaming and boiling actually take different amounts of time .
Steaming ought to be faster .
It turns out it isnt because of something called film condensation , and this explains that .
Well , that first cutaway picture worked , so we said ,  Okay , lets do some more . 
So heres another one .
We discovered why woks are the shape they are .
This shaped wok doesnt work very well ; this caught fire three times .
But we had a philosophy , which is it only has to look good for a thousandth of a second .
And one of our canning cutaways .
Once you start cutting things in half , you kind of get carried away , so you see we cut the jars in half as well as the pan .
And each of these text blocks explains a key thing thats going on .
In this case , boiling water canning is for canning things that are already pretty acidic .
You dont have to heat them up as hot as you would something you do pressure canning because bacterial spores cant grow in the acid .
So this is great for pickled vegetables , which is what were canning here .
Heres our hamburger cutaway .
One of our philosophies in the book is that no dish is really intrinsically any better than any other dish .
So you can lavish all the same care , all the same technique , on a hamburger as you would on some much more fancy dish .
And if you do lavish as much technique as possible , and you try to make the highest quality hamburger , it gets to be a little bit involved .
The New York Times ran a piece after my book was delayed and it was called  The Wait for the 30 - Hour Hamburger Just Got Longer . 
Because our hamburger recipe , our ultimate hamburger recipe , if you make the buns and you marinate the meat and you do all this stuff , it does take about 30 hours .
Of course , youre not actually working the whole time .
Most of the time is kind of sitting there .
The point of this cutaway is to show people a view of hamburgers they havent seen before and to explain the physics of hamburgers and the chemistry of hamburgers , because , believe it or not , there is something to the physics and chemistry  -  -  in particular , those flames underneath the burger .
Most of the characteristic char - grilled taste doesnt come from the wood or the charcoal .
Buying mesquite charcoal will not actually make that much difference .
Mostly it comes from fat pyrolyzing , or burning .
So its the fat that drips down and flares up that causes the characteristic taste .
Now you might wonder , how do we make these cutaways ?
Most people assume we use Photoshop .
And the answer is : no , not really ; we use a machine shop .
And it turns out , the best way to cut things in half is to actually cut them in half .
So we have two halves of one of the best kitchens in the world .
We cut a $ 5,000 restaurant oven in half .
The manufacturer said ,  What would it take for you to cut one in half ? 
I said ,  It would have to show up free . 
And so it showed up , we used it a little while , we cut it in half .
Now you can also see a little bit how we did some of these shots .
We would glue a piece of Pyrex or heat - resistant glass in front .
We used a red , very high - temperature silicon to do that .
The great thing is , when you cut something in half , you have another half .
So you photograph that in exactly the same position , and then you can substitute in  -  -  and that part does use Photoshop  -  -  just the edges .
So its very much like in a Hollywood movie where a guy flies through the air , supported by wires , and then they take the wires away digitally so youre flying through the air .
In most cases , though , there was no glass .
Like for the hamburger , we just cut the damn barbecue .
And so those coals that kept falling off the edge , we kept having to put them back up .
But again , it only has to work for a thousandth of a second .
The wok shot caught fire three times .
What happens when you have your wok cut in half is the oil goes down into the fire and whoosh !
One of our cooks lost his eyebrows that way .
But hey , they grow back .
In addition to cutaways , we also explain physics .
This is Fouriers law of heat conduction .
Its a partial differential equation .
We have the only cookbook in the world that has partial differential equations in it .
But to make them palatable , we cut it out of a steel plate and put it in front of a fire and photographed it like this .
Weve got lots of little tidbits in the book .
Everybody knows that your various appliances have wattage , right ?
But you probably dont know that much about James Watt .
But now you will ; we put a biography of James Watt in .
Its a little couple paragraphs to explain why we call that unit of heat the watt , and where he got his inspiration .
It turned out he was hired by a Scottish distillery to understand why they were burning so damn much peat to distill the whiskey .
We also did a lot of calculation .
I personally wrote thousands of lines of code to write this cookbook .
Heres a calculation that shows how the intensity of a barbecue , or other radiant heat source , goes as you move away from it .
So as you move vertically away from this surface , the heat falls off .
As you move side to side , it moves off .
That horn - shaped region is what we call the sweet spot .
Thats the place where the heat is even to within 10 percent .
So thats the place where you really want to cook .
And its got this funny horn - shaped thing , which as far as I know , again , the first cookbook to ever do this .
Now it may also be the last cookbook that ever does it .
You know , theres two ways you can make a product .
You can do lots of market research and do focus groups and figure out what people really want , or you can just kind of go for it and make the book you want and hope other people like it .
Heres a step - by - step that shows grinding hamburger .
If you really want great hamburger , it turns out it makes a difference if you align the grain .
And its really simple , as you can see here .
As it comes out of the grinder , you just have a little tray , and you just take it off in little passes , build it up , slice it vertically .
Heres the final hamburger .
This is the 30 - hour hamburger .
We make every aspect of this burger .
The lettuce has got liquid smoke infused into it .
We also have things about how to make the bun .
Theres a mushroom , ketchup  -  -  it goes on and on .
Now watch closely . This is popcorn . Ill explain it here .
The popcorn is illustrating a key thing in physics .
Isnt that beautiful ?
We have a very high - speed camera , which we had lots of fun with on the book .
The key physics principle here is when water boils to steam it expands by a factor of 1,600 .
Thats whats happening to the water inside that popcorn .
So its a great illustration of that .
Now Im going to close with a video that is kind of unusual .
We have a chapter on gels .
And because people watch Mythbusters and CSI , I thought , well , lets put in a recipe for a ballistics gelatin .
Well , if you have a high - speed camera , and you have a block of ballistics gelatin lying around , pretty soon somebody does this .
Now the amazing thing here is that a ballistics gelatin is supposed to mimic what happens to human flesh when you get shot  -  -  thats why you shouldnt get shot .
The other amazing thing is , when this ballistics gelatin comes down , it falls back down as a nice block .
Anyway , heres the book .
Here it is .
2,438 pages .
And theyre nice big pages too .
A friend of mine complained that this was too big and too pretty to go in the kitchen , so theres a sixth volume that has washable , waterproof paper .
Brian Greene : Is our universe the only universe ?
Is there more than one universe ? In this visually rich , action - packed talk , Brian Greene shows how the unanswered questions of physics have led to the theory that our own universe is just one of many in the  multiverse . 
A few months ago the Nobel Prize in physics was awarded to two teams of astronomers for a discovery that has been hailed as one of the most important astronomical observations ever .
And today , after briefly describing what they found , Im going to tell you about a highly controversial framework for explaining their discovery , namely the possibility that way beyond the Earth , the Milky Way and other distant galaxies , we may find that our universe is not the only universe , but is instead part of a vast complex of universes that we call the multiverse .
Now the idea of a multiverse is a strange one .
I mean , most of us were raised to believe that the word  universe  means everything .
And I say most of us with forethought , as my four - year - old daughter has heard me speak of these ideas since she was born .
And last year I was holding her and I said ,  Sophia , I love you more than anything in the universe . 
And she turned to me and said ,  Daddy , universe or multiverse ? 
But barring such an anomalous upbringing , it is strange to imagine other realms separate from ours , most with fundamentally different features , that would rightly be called universes of their own .
And yet , speculative though the idea surely is , I aim to convince you that theres reason for taking it seriously , as it just might be right .
Im going to tell the story of the multiverse in three parts .
In part one , Im going to describe those Nobel Prize - winning results and to highlight a profound mystery which those results revealed .
In part two , Ill offer a solution to that mystery .
Its based on an approach called string theory , and thats where the idea of the multiverse will come into the story .
Finally , in part three , Im going to describe a cosmological theory called inflation , which will pull all the pieces of the story together .
Okay , part one starts back in 1929 when the great astronomer Edwin Hubble realized that the distant galaxies were all rushing away from us , establishing that space itself is stretching , its expanding .
Now this was revolutionary .
The prevailing wisdom was that on the largest of scales the universe was static .
But even so , there was one thing that everyone was certain of : The expansion must be slowing down .
That , much as the gravitational pull of the Earth slows the ascent of an apple tossed upward , the gravitational pull of each galaxy on every other must be slowing the expansion of space .
Now lets fast - forward to the 1990s when those two teams of astronomers I mentioned at the outset were inspired by this reasoning to measure the rate at which the expansion has been slowing .
And they did this by painstaking observations of numerous distant galaxies , allowing them to chart how the expansion rate has changed over time .
Heres the surprise : They found that the expansion is not slowing down .
Instead they found that its speeding up , going faster and faster .
Thats like tossing an apple upward and it goes up faster and faster .
Now if you saw an apple do that , youd want to know why .
Whats pushing on it ?
Similarly , the astronomers results are surely well - deserving of the Nobel Prize , but they raised an analogous question .
What force is driving all galaxies to rush away from every other at an ever - quickening speed ?
Well the most promising answer comes from an old idea of Einsteins .
You see , we are all used to gravity being a force that does one thing , pulls objects together .
But in Einsteins theory of gravity , his general theory of relativity , gravity can also push things apart .
How ? Well according to Einsteins math , if space is uniformly filled with an invisible energy , sort of like a uniform , invisible mist , then the gravity generated by that mist would be repulsive , repulsive gravity , which is just what we need to explain the observations .
Because the repulsive gravity of an invisible energy in space  -  -  we now call it dark energy , but Ive made it smokey white here so you can see it  -  -  its repulsive gravity would cause each galaxy to push against every other , driving expansion to speed up , not slow down .
And this explanation represents great progress .
But I promised you a mystery here in part one .
Here it is .
When the astronomers worked out how much of this dark energy must be infusing space to account for the cosmic speed up , look at what they found .
This number is small .
Expressed in the relevant unit , it is spectacularly small .
And the mystery is to explain this peculiar number .
We want this number to emerge from the laws of physics , but so far no one has found a way to do that .
Now you might wonder , should you care ?
Maybe explaining this number is just a technical issue , a technical detail of interest to experts , but of no relevance to anybody else .
Well it surely is a technical detail , but some details really matter .
Some details provide windows into uncharted realms of reality , and this peculiar number may be doing just that , as the only approach thats so far made headway to explain it invokes the possibility of other universes  -  -  an idea that naturally emerges from string theory , which takes me to part two : string theory .
So hold the mystery of the dark energy in the back of your mind as I now go on to tell you three key things about string theory .
First off , what is it ?
Well its an approach to realize Einsteins dream of a unified theory of physics , a single overarching framework that would be able to describe all the forces at work in the universe .
And the central idea of string theory is quite straightforward .
It says that if you examine any piece of matter ever more finely , at first youll find molecules and then youll find atoms and subatomic particles .
But the theory says that if you could probe smaller , much smaller than we can with existing technology , youd find something else inside these particles  -  -  a little tiny vibrating filament of energy , a little tiny vibrating string .
And just like the strings on a violin , they can vibrate in different patterns producing different musical notes .
These little fundamental strings , when they vibrate in different patterns , they produce different kinds of particles  -  -  so electrons , quarks , neutrinos , photons , all other particles would be united into a single framework , as they would all arise from vibrating strings .
Its a compelling picture , a kind of cosmic symphony , where all the richness that we see in the world around us emerges from the music that these little , tiny strings can play .
But theres a cost to this elegant unification , because years of research have shown that the math of string theory doesnt quite work .
It has internal inconsistencies , unless we allow for something wholly unfamiliar  -  -  extra dimensions of space .
That is , we all know about the usual three dimensions of space .
And you can think about those as height , width and depth .
But string theory says that , on fantastically small scales , there are additional dimensions crumpled to a tiny size so small that we have not detected them .
But even though the dimensions are hidden , they would have an impact on things that we can observe because the shape of the extra dimensions constrains how the strings can vibrate .
And in string theory , vibration determines everything .
So particle masses , the strengths of forces , and most importantly , the amount of dark energy would be determined by the shape of the extra dimensions .
So if we knew the shape of the extra dimensions , we should be able to calculate these features , calculate the amount of dark energy .
The challenge is we dont know the shape of the extra dimensions .
All we have is a list of candidate shapes allowed by the math .
Now when these ideas were first developed , there were only about five different candidate shapes , so you can imagine analyzing them one - by - one to determine if any yield the physical features we observe .
But over time the list grew as researchers found other candidate shapes .
From five , the number grew into the hundreds and then the thousands  -  -  A large , but still manageable , collection to analyze , since after all , graduate students need something to do .
But then the list continued to grow into the millions and the billions , until today .
The list of candidate shapes has soared to about 10 to the 500 .
So , what to do ?
Well some researchers lost heart , concluding that was so many candidate shapes for the extra dimensions , each giving rise to different physical features , string theory would never make definitive , testable predictions .
But others turned this issue on its head , taking us to the possibility of a multiverse .
Heres the idea .
Maybe each of these shapes is on an equal footing with every other .
Each is as real as every other , in the sense that there are many universes , each with a different shape , for the extra dimensions .
And this radical proposal has a profound impact on this mystery : the amount of dark energy revealed by the Nobel Prize - winning results .
Because you see , if there are other universes , and if those universes each have , say , a different shape for the extra dimensions , then the physical features of each universe will be different , and in particular , the amount of dark energy in each universe will be different .
Which means that the mystery of explaining the amount of dark energy weve now measured would take on a wholly different character .
In this context , the laws of physics cant explain one number for the dark energy because there isnt just one number , there are many numbers .
Which means we have been asking the wrong question .
Its that the right question to ask is , why do we humans find ourselves in a universe with a particular amount of dark energy weve measured instead of any of the other possibilities that are out there ?
And thats a question on which we can make headway .
Because those universes that have much more dark energy than ours , whenever matter tries to clump into galaxies , the repulsive push of the dark energy is so strong that it blows the clump apart and galaxies dont form .
And in those universes that have much less dark energy , well they collapse back on themselves so quickly that , again , galaxies dont form .
And without galaxies , there are no stars , no planets and no chance for our form of life to exist in those other universes .
So we find ourselves in a universe with the particular amount of dark energy weve measured simply because our universe has conditions hospitable to our form of life .
And that would be that .
Mystery solved , multiverse found .
Now some find this explanation unsatisfying .
Were used to physics giving us definitive explanations for the features we observe .
But the point is , if the feature youre observing can and does take on a wide variety of different values across the wider landscape of reality , then thinking one explanation for a particular value is simply misguided .
An early example comes from the great astronomer Johannes Kepler who was obsessed with understanding a different number  -  -  why the Sun is 93 million miles away from the Earth .
And he worked for decades trying to explain this number , but he never succeeded , and we know why .
Kepler was asking the wrong question .
We now know that there are many planets at a wide variety of different distances from their host stars .
So hoping that the laws of physics will explain one particular number , 93 million miles , well that is simply wrongheaded .
Instead the right question to ask is , why do we humans find ourselves on a planet at this particular distance , instead of any of the other possibilities ?
And again , thats a question we can answer .
Those planets which are much closer to a star like the Sun would be so hot that our form of life wouldnt exist .
And those planets that are much farther away from the star , well theyre so cold that , again , our form of life would not take hold .
So we find ourselves on a planet at this particular distance simply because it yields conditions vital to our form of life .
And when it comes to planets and their distances , this clearly is the right kind of reasoning .
The point is , when it comes to universes and the dark energy that they contain , it may also be the right kind of reasoning .
One key difference , of course , is we know that there are other planets out there , but so far Ive only speculated on the possibility that there might be other universes .
So to pull it all together , we need a mechanism that can actually generate other universes .
And that takes me to my final part , part three .
Because such a mechanism has been found by cosmologists trying to understand the Big Bang .
You see , when we speak of the Big Bang , we often have an image of a kind of cosmic explosion that created our universe and set space rushing outward .
But theres a little secret .
The Big Bang leaves out something pretty important , the Bang .
It tells us how the universe evolved after the Bang , but gives us no insight into what would have powered the Bang itself .
And this gap was finally filled by an enhanced version of the Big Bang theory .
Its called inflationary cosmology , which identified a particular kind of fuel that would naturally generate an outward rush of space .
The fuel is based on something called a quantum field , but the only detail that matters for us is that this fuel proves to be so efficient that its virtually impossible to use it all up , which means in the inflationary theory , the Big Bang giving rise to our universe is likely not a one - time event .
Instead the fuel not only generated our Big Bang , but it would also generate countless other Big Bangs , each giving rise to its own separate universe with our universe becoming but one bubble in a grand cosmic bubble bath of universes .
And now , when we meld this with string theory , heres the picture were led to .
Each of these universes has extra dimensions .
The extra dimensions take on a wide variety of different shapes .
The different shapes yield different physical features .
And we find ourselves in one universe instead of another simply because its only in our universe that the physical features , like the amount of dark energy , are right for our form of life to take hold .
And this is the compelling but highly controversial picture of the wider cosmos that cutting - edge observation and theory have now led us to seriously consider .
One big remaining question , of course , is , could we ever confirm the existence of other universes ?
Well let me describe one way that might one day happen .
The inflationary theory already has strong observational support .
Because the theory predicts that the Big Bang would have been so intense that as space rapidly expanded , tiny quantum jitters from the micro world would have been stretched out to the macro world , yielding a distinctive fingerprint , a pattern of slightly hotter spots and slightly colder spots , across space , which powerful telescopes have now observed .
Going further , if there are other universes , the theory predicts that every so often those universes can collide .
And if our universe got hit by another , that collision would generate an additional subtle pattern of temperature variations across space that we might one day be able to detect .
And so exotic as this picture is , it may one day be grounded in observations , establishing the existence of other universes .
Ill conclude with a striking implication of all these ideas for the very far future .
You see , we learned that our universe is not static , that space is expanding , that that expansion is speeding up and that there might be other universes all by carefully examining faint pinpoints of starlight coming to us from distant galaxies .
But because the expansion is speeding up , in the very far future , those galaxies will rush away so far and so fast that we wont be able to see them  -  -  not because of technological limitations , but because of the laws of physics .
The light those galaxies emit , even traveling at the fastest speed , the speed of light , will not be able to overcome the ever - widening gulf between us .
So astronomers in the far future looking out into deep space will see nothing but an endless stretch of static , inky , black stillness .
And they will conclude that the universe is static and unchanging and populated by a single central oasis of matter that they inhabit  -  -  a picture of the cosmos that we definitively know to be wrong .
Now maybe those future astronomers will have records handed down from an earlier era , like ours , attesting to an expanding cosmos teeming with galaxies .
But would those future astronomers believe such ancient knowledge ?
Or would they believe in the black , static empty universe that their own state - of - the - art observations reveal ?
I suspect the latter .
Which means that we are living through a remarkably privileged era when certain deep truths about the cosmos are still within reach of the human spirit of exploration .
It appears that it may not always be that way .
Because todays astronomers , by turning powerful telescopes to the sky , have captured a handful of starkly informative photons  -  -  a kind of cosmic telegram billions of years in transit .
and the message echoing across the ages is clear .
Sometimes nature guards her secrets with the unbreakable grip of physical law .
Sometimes the true nature of reality beckons from just beyond the horizon .
Thank you very much .
Brian , thank you .
The range of ideas youve just spoken about are dizzying , exhilarating , incredible .
How do you think of where cosmology is now , in a sort of historical side ?
Are we in the middle of something unusual historically in your opinion ?
Well its hard to say .
When we learn that astronomers of the far future may not have enough information to figure things out , the natural question is , maybe were already in that position and certain deep , critical features of the universe already have escaped our ability to understand because of how cosmology evolves .
So from that perspective , maybe we will always be asking questions and never be able to fully answer them .
On the other hand , we now can understand how old the universe is .
We can understand how to understand the data from the microwave background radiation that was set down 13.72 billion years ago  -  -  and yet , we can do calculations today to predict how it will look and it matches .
Holy cow ! Thats just amazing .
So on the one hand , its just incredible where weve gotten , but who knows what sort of blocks we may find in the future .
Youre going to be around for the next few days .
Maybe some of these conversations can continue .
Thank you . Thank you , Brian .
Michael Tilson Thomas : Music and emotion through time
In this epic overview , Michael Tilson Thomas traces the development of classical music through the development of written notation , the record , and the re - mix .
Well when I was asked to do this TEDTalk , I was really chuckled , because , you see , my fathers name was Ted , and much of my life , especially my musical life , is really a talk that Im still having with him , or the part of me that he continues to be .
Now Ted was a New Yorker , an all - around theater guy , and he was a self - taught illustrator and musician .
He didnt read a note , and he was profoundly hearing impaired .
Yet , he was my greatest teacher .
Because even through the squeaks of his hearing aids , his understanding of music was profound .
And for him , it wasnt so much the way the music goes as about what it witnesses and where it can take you .
And he did a painting of this experience , which he called  In the Realm of Music . 
Now Ted entered this realm every day by improvising in a sort of Tin Pan Alley style like this .
But he was tough when it came to music .
He said ,  There are only two things that matter in music : what and how .
And the thing about classical music , that what and how , its inexhaustible . 
That was his passion for the music .
Both my parents really loved it .
They didnt know all that much about it , but they gave me the opportunity to discover it together with them .
And I think inspired by that memory , its been my desire to try and bring it to as many other people as I can , sort of pass it on through whatever means .
And how people get this music , how it comes into their lives , really fascinates me .
One day in New York , I was on the street and I saw some kids playing baseball between stoops and cars and fire hydrants .
And a tough , slouchy kid got up to bat , and he took a swing and really connected .
And he watched the ball fly for a second , and then he went ,  Dah dadaratatatah .
Brah dada dadadadah . 
And he ran around the bases .
And I thought , go figure .
How did this piece of 18th century Austrian aristocratic entertainment turn into the victory crow of this New York kid ?
How was that passed on ? How did he get to hear Mozart ?
Well when it comes to classical music , theres an awful lot to pass on , much more than Mozart , Beethoven or Tchiakovsky .
Because classical music is an unbroken living tradition that goes back over 1,000 years .
And every one of those years has had something unique and powerful to say to us about what its like to be alive .
Now the raw material of it , of course , is just the music of everyday life .
Its all the anthems and dance crazes and ballads and marches .
But what classical music does is to distill all of these musics down , to condense them to their absolute essence , and from that essence create a new language , a language that speaks very lovingly and unflinchingly about who we really are .
Its a language thats still evolving .
Now over the centuries it grew into the big pieces we always think of , like concertos and symphonies , but even the most ambitious masterpiece can have as its central mission to bring you back to a fragile and personal moment  -  -  like this one from the Beethoven Violin Concerto .
Its so simple , so evocative .
So many emotions seem to be inside of it .
Yet , of course , like all music , its essentially not about anything .
Its just a design of pitches and silence and time .
And the pitches , the notes , as you know , are just vibrations .
Theyre locations in the spectrum of sound .
And whether we call them 440 per second , A , or 3,729 , B flat  -  -  trust me , thats right  -  -  theyre just phenomena .
But the way we react to different combinations of these phenomena is complex and emotional and not totally understood .
And the way we react to them has changed radically over the centuries , as have our preferences for them .
So for example , in the 11th century , people liked pieces that ended like this .
And in the 17th century , it was more like this .
And in the 21st century ...
Now your 21st century ears are quite happy with this last chord , even though a while back it would have puzzled or annoyed you or sent some of you running from the room .
And the reason you like it is because youve inherited , whether you knew it or not , centuries - worth of changes in musical theory , practice and fashion .
And in classical music we can follow these changes very , very accurately because of the musics powerful silent partner , the way its been passed on : notation .
Now the impulse to notate , or , more exactly I should say , encode music has been with us for a very long time .
In 200 B.C . , a man named Sekulos wrote this song for his departed wife and inscribed it on her gravestone in the notational system of the Greeks .
And a thousand years later , this impulse to notate took an entirely different form .
And you can see how this happened in these excerpts from the Christmas mass  Puer Natus est nobis ,   For Us is Born . 
In the 10th century , little squiggles were used just to indicate the general shape of the tune .
And in the 12th century , a line was drawn , like a musical horizon line , to better pinpoint the pitchs location .
And then in the 13th century , more lines and new shapes of notes locked in the concept of the tune exactly , and that led to the kind of notation we have today .
Well notation not only passed the music on , notating and encoding the music changed its priorities entirely , because it enabled the musicians to imagine music on a much vaster scale .
Now inspired moves of improvisation could be recorded , saved , considered , prioritized , made into intricate designs .
And from this moment , classical music became what it most essentially is , a dialogue between the two powerful sides of our nature : instinct and intelligence .
And there began to be a real difference at this point between the art of improvisation and the art of composition .
Now an improviser senses and plays the next cool move , but a composer is considering all possible moves , testing them out , prioritizing them out , until he sees how they can form a powerful and coherent design of ultimate and enduring coolness .
Now some of the greatest composers , like Bach , were combinations of these two things .
Bach was like a great improviser with a mind of a chess master .
Mozart was the same way .
But every musician strikes a different balance between faith and reason , instinct and intelligence .
And every musical era had different priorities of these things , different things to pass on , different whats and hows .
So in the first eight centuries or so of this tradition the big what was to praise God .
And by the 1400s , music was being written that tried to mirror Gods mind as could be seen in the design of the night sky .
The how was a style called polyphony , music of many independently moving voices that suggested the way the planets seemed to move in Ptolemys geocentric universe .
This was truly the music of the spheres .
This is the kind of music that Leonardo DaVinci would have known .
And perhaps its tremendous intellectual perfection and serenity meant that something new had to happen  -  -  a radical new move , which in 1600 is what did happen .
Singer : Ah , bitter blow !
Ah , wicked , cruel fate !
Ah , baleful stars !
Ah , avaricious heaven !
MTT : This , of course , was the birth of opera , and its development put music on a radical new course .
The what now was not to mirror the mind of God , but to follow the emotion turbulence of man .
And the how was harmony , stacking up the pitches to form chords .
And the chords , it turned out , were capable of representing incredible varieties of emotions .
And the basic chords were the ones we still have with us , the triads , either the major one , which we think is happy , or the minor one , which we perceive as sad .
But whats the actual difference between these two chords ?
Its just these two notes in the middle .
Its either E natural , and 659 vibrations per second , or E flat , at 622 .
So the big difference between human happiness and sadness ?
37 freakin vibrations .
So you can see in a system like this there was enormous subtle potential of representing human emotions .
And in fact , as man began to understand more his complex and ambivalent nature , harmony grew more complex to reflect it .
Turns out it was capable of expressing emotions beyond the ability of words .
Now with all this possibility , classical music really took off .
Its the time in which the big forms began to arise .
And the effects of technology began to be felt also , because printing put music , the scores , the codebooks of music , into the hands of performers everywhere .
And new and improved instruments made the age of the virtuoso possible .
This is when those big forms arose  -  -  the symphonies , the sonatas , the concertos .
And in these big architectures of time , composers like Beethoven could share the insights of a lifetime .
A piece like Beethovens Fifth basically witnessing how it was possible for him to go from sorrow and anger , over the course of a half an hour , step by exacting step of his route , to the moment when he could make it across to joy .
And it turned out the symphony could be used for more complex issues , like gripping ones of culture , such as nationalism or quest for freedom or the frontiers of sensuality .
But whatever direction the music took , one thing until recently was always the same , and that was when the musicians stopped playing , the music stopped .
Now this moment so fascinates me .
I find it such a profound one .
What happens when the music stops ?
Where does it go ? Whats left ?
What sticks with people in the audience at the end of a performance ?
Is it a melody or a rhythm or a mood or an attitude ?
And how might that change their lives ?
To me this is the intimate , personal side of music .
Its the passing on part . Its the why part of it .
And to me thats the most essential of all .
Mostly its been a person - to - person thing , a teacher - student , performer - audience thing , and then around 1880 came this new technology that first mechanically then through analogs then digitally created a new and miraculous way of passing things on , albeit an impersonal one .
People could now hear music all the time , even though it wasnt necessary for them to play an instrument , read music or even go to concerts .
And technology democratized music by making everything available .
It spearheaded a cultural revolution in which artists like Caruso and Bessie Smith were on the same footing .
And technology pushed composers to tremendous extremes , using computers and synthesizers to create works of intellectually impenetrable complexity beyond the means of performers and audiences .
At the same time technology , by taking over the role that notation had always played , shifted the balance within music between instinct and intelligence way over to the instinctive side .
The culture in which we live now is awash with music of improvisation thats been sliced , diced , layered and , God knows , distributed and sold .
Whats the long - term effect of this on us or on music ?
Nobody knows .
The question remains : What happens when the music stops ?
What sticks with people ?
Now that we have unlimited access to music , what does stick with us ?
Well let me show you a story of what I mean by  really sticking with us . 
I was visiting a cousin of mine in an old age home , and I spied a very shaky old man making his way across the room on a walker .
He came over to a piano that was there , and he balanced himself and began playing something like this .
And he said something like ,  Me ... boy ... symphony ... Beethoven . 
And I suddenly got it , and I said ,  Friend , by any chance are you trying to play this ? 
And he said ,  Yes , yes . I was a little boy .
The symphony : Isaac Stern , the concerto , I heard it . 
And I thought , my God , how much must this music mean to this man that he would get himself out of his bed , across the room to recover the memory of this music that , after everything else in his life is sloughing away , still means so much to him ?
Well , thats why I take every performance so seriously , why it matters to me so much .
I never know who might be there , who might be absorbing it and what will happen to it in their life .
But now Im excited that theres more chance than ever before possible of sharing this music .
Thats what drives my interest in projects like the TV series  Keeping Score  with the San Francisco Symphony that looks at the backstories of music , and working with the young musicians at the New World Symphony on projects that explore the potential of the new performing arts centers for both entertainment and education .
And of course , the New World Symphony led to the YouTube Symphony and projects on the internet that reach out to musicians and audiences all over the world .
And the exciting thing is all this is just a prototype .
Theres just a role here for so many people  -  -  teachers , parents , performers  -  -  to be explorers together .
Sure , the big events attract a lot of attention , but what really matters is what goes on every single day .
We need your perspectives , your curiosity , your voices .
And it excites me now to meet people who are hikers , chefs , code writers , taxi drivers , people I never would have guessed who loved the music and who are passing it on .
You dont need to worry about knowing anything .
If youre curious , if you have a capacity for wonder , if youre alive , you know all that you need to know .
You can start anywhere . Ramble a bit .
Follow traces . Get lost . Be surprised , amused inspired .
All that what , all that how is out there waiting for you to discover its why , to dive in and pass it on .
Thank you .
Boghuma Kabisen Titanji : Ethical riddles in HIV research
Its an all too common story : after participating in an HIV clinical trial , a woman in sub - Saharan Africa is left without the resources to buy a bus ticket to her health clinic , let alone to afford life - saving antiretrovirals . Boghuma Kabisen Titanji asks an important question : how can researchers looking for a cure make sure theyre not taking advantage of those most affected by the pandemic ?
Id like to share with you the story of one of my patients called Celine .
Celine is a housewife and lives in a rural district of Cameroon in west Central Africa .
Six years ago , at the time of her HIV diagnosis , she was recruited to participate in the clinical trial which was running in her health district at the time .
When I first met Celine , a little over a year ago , she had gone for 18 months without any antiretroviral therapy , and she was very ill .
She told me that she stopped coming to the clinic when the trial ended because she had no money for the bus fare and was too ill to walk the 35 - kilometer distance .
Now during the clinical trial , shed been given all her antiretroviral drugs free of charge , and her transportation costs had been covered by the research funds .
All of these ended once the trial was completed , leaving Celine with no alternatives .
She was unable to tell me the names of the drugs shed received during the trial , or even what the trial had been about .
I didnt bother to ask her what the results of the trial were because it seemed obvious to me that she would have no clue .
Yet what puzzled me most was Celine had given her informed consent to be a part of this trial , yet she clearly did not understand the implications of being a participant or what would happen to her once the trial had been completed .
Now , I have shared this story with you as an example of what can happen to participants in the clinical trial when it is poorly conducted .
Maybe this particular trial yielded exciting results .
Maybe it even got published in a high - profile scientific journal .
Maybe it would inform clinicians around the world on how to improve on the clinical management of HIV patients .
But it would have done so at a price to hundreds of patients who , like Celine , were left to their own devices once the research had been completed .
I do not stand here today to suggest in any way that conducting HIV clinical trials in developing countries is bad .
On the contrary , clinical trials are extremely useful tools , and are much needed to address the burden of disease in developing countries .
However , the inequalities that exist between richer countries and developing countries in terms of funding pose a real risk for exploitation , especially in the context of externally - funded research .
Sadly enough , the fact remains that a lot of the studies that are conducted in developing countries could never be authorized in the richer countries which fund the research .
Im sure you must be asking yourselves what makes developing countries , especially those in sub - Saharan Africa , so attractive for these HIV clinical trials ?
Well , in order for a clinical trial to generate valid and widely applicable results , they need to be conducted with large numbers of study participants and preferably on a population with a high incidence of new HIV infections .
Sub - Saharan Africa largely fits this description , with 22 million people living with HIV , an estimated 70 percent of the 30 million people who are infected worldwide .
Also , research within the continent is a lot easier to conduct due to widespread poverty , endemic diseases and inadequate health care systems .
A clinical trial that is considered to be potentially beneficial to the population is more likely to be authorized , and in the absence of good health care systems , almost any offer of medical assistance is accepted as better than nothing .
Even more problematic reasons include lower risk of litigation , less rigorous ethical reviews , and populations that are willing to participate in almost any study that hints at a cure .
As funding for HIV research increases in developing countries and ethical review in richer countries become more strict , you can see why this context becomes very , very attractive .
The high prevalence of HIV drives researchers to conduct research that is sometimes scientifically acceptable but on many levels ethically questionable .
How then can we ensure that , in our search for the cure , we do not take an unfair advantage of those who are already most affected by the pandemic ?
I invite you to consider four areas I think we can focus on in order to improve the way in which things are done .
The first of these is informed consent .
Now , in order for a clinical trial to be considered ethically acceptable , participants must be given the relevant information in a way in which they can understand , and must freely consent to participate in the trial .
This is especially important in developing countries , where a lot of participants consent to research because they believe it is the only way in which they can receive medical care or other benefits .
Consent procedures that are used in richer countries are often inappropriate or ineffective in a lot of developing countries .
For example , it is counterintuitive to have an illiterate study participant , like Celine , sign a lengthy consent form that they are unable to read , let alone understand .
Local communities need to be more involved in establishing the criteria for recruiting participants in clinical trials , as well as the incentives for participation .
The information in these trials needs to be given to the potential participants in linguistically and culturally acceptable formats .
The second point I would like for you to consider is the standard of care that is provided to participants within any clinical trial .
Now , this is subject to a lot of debate and controversy .
Should the control group in the clinical trial be given the best current treatment which is available anywhere in the world ?
Or should they be given an alternative standard of care , such as the best current treatment available in the country in which the research is being conducted ?
Is it fair to evaluate a treatment regimen which may not be affordable or accessible to the study participants once the research has been completed ?
Now , in a situation where the best current treatment is inexpensive and simple to deliver , the answer is straightforward .
However , the best current treatment available anywhere in the world is often very difficult to provide in developing countries .
It is important to assess the potential risks and benefits of the standard of care which is to be provided to participants in any clinical trial , and establish one which is relevant for the context of the study and most beneficial for the participants within the study .
That brings us to the third point I want you think about : the ethical review of research .
An effective system for reviewing the ethical suitability of clinical trials is primordial to safeguard participants within any clinical trial .
Unfortunately , this is often lacking or inefficient in a lot of developing countries .
Local governments need to set up effective systems for reviewing the ethical issues around the clinical trials which are authorized in different developing countries , and they need to do this by setting up ethical review committees that are independent of the government and research sponsors .
Public accountability needs to be promoted through transparency and independent review by nongovernmental and international organizations as appropriate .
The final point I would like for you to consider tonight is what happens to participants in the clinical trial once the research has been completed .
I think it is absolutely wrong for research to begin in the first place without a clear plan for what would happen to the participants once the trial has ended .
Now , researchers need to make every effort to ensure that an intervention that has been shown to be beneficial during a clinical trial is accessible to the participants of the trial once the trial has been completed .
In addition , they should be able to consider the possibility of introducing and maintaining effective treatments in the wider community once the trial ends .
If , for any reason , they feel that this might not be possible , then I think they should have to ethically justify why the clinical trial should be conducted in the first place .
Now , fortunately for Celine , our meeting did not end in my office .
I was able to get her enrolled into a free HIV treatment program closer to her home , and with a support group to help her cope .
Her story has a positive ending , but there are thousands of others in similar situations who are much less fortunate .
Although she may not know this , my encounter with Celine has completely changed the way in which I view HIV clinical trials in developing countries , and made me even more determined to be part of the movement to change the way in which things are done .
I believe that every single person listening to me tonight can be part of that change .
If you are a researcher , I hold you to a higher standard of moral conscience , to remain ethical in your research , and not compromise human welfare in your search for answers .
If you work for a funding agency or pharmaceutical company , I challenge you to hold your employers to fund research that is ethically sound .
If you come from a developing country like myself , I urge you to hold your government to a more thorough review of the clinical trials which are authorized in your country .
Yes , there is a need for us to find a cure for HIV , to find an effective vaccine for malaria , to find a diagnostic tool that works for T.B . , but I believe that we owe it to those who willingly and selflessly consent to participate in these clinical trials to do this in a humane way .
Thank you .
Jared Diamond : How societies can grow old better
Theres an irony behind the latest efforts to extend human life : Its no picnic to be an old person in a youth - oriented society . Older people can become isolated , lacking meaningful work and low on funds . In this intriguing talk , Jared Diamond looks at how many different societies treat their elders  -  -  some better , some worse  -  -  and suggests we all take advantage of experience .
To give me an idea of how many of you here may find what Im about to tell you of practical value , let me ask you please to raise your hands : Who here is either over 65 years old or hopes to live past age 65 or has parents or grandparents who did live or have lived past 65 , raise your hands please .
Okay . You are the people to whom my talk will be of practical value .
The rest of you wont find my talk personally relevant , but I think that you will still find the subject fascinating .
Im going to talk about growing older in traditional societies .
This subject constitutes just one chapter of my latest book , which compares traditional , small , tribal societies with our large , modern societies , with respect to many topics such as bringing up children , growing older , health , dealing with danger , settling disputes , religion and speaking more than one language .
Those tribal societies , which constituted all human societies for most of human history , are far more diverse than are our modern , recent , big societies .
All big societies that have governments , and where most people are strangers to each other , are inevitably similar to each other and different from tribal societies .
Tribes constitute thousands of natural experiments in how to run a human society .
They constitute experiments from which we ourselves may be able to learn .
Tribal societies shouldnt be scorned as primitive and miserable , but also they shouldnt be romanticized as happy and peaceful .
When we learn of tribal practices , some of them will horrify us , but there are other tribal practices which , when we hear about them , we may admire and envy and wonder whether we could adopt those practices ourselves .
Most old people in the U.S . end up living separately from their children and from most of their friends of their earlier years , and often they live in separate retirements homes for the elderly , whereas in traditional societies , older people instead live out their lives among their children , their other relatives , and their lifelong friends .
Nevertheless , the treatment of the elderly varies enormously among traditional societies , from much worse to much better than in our modern societies .
At the worst extreme , many traditional societies get rid of their elderly in one of four increasingly direct ways : by neglecting their elderly and not feeding or cleaning them until they die , or by abandoning them when the group moves , or by encouraging older people to commit suicide , or by killing older people .
In which tribal societies do children abandon or kill their parents ?
It happens mainly under two conditions .
One is in nomadic , hunter - gather societies that often shift camp and that are physically incapable of transporting old people who cant walk when the able - bodied younger people already have to carry their young children and all their physical possessions .
The other condition is in societies living in marginal or fluctuating environments , such as the Arctic or deserts , where there are periodic food shortages , and occasionally there just isnt enough food to keep everyone alive .
Whatever food is available has to be reserved for able - bodied adults and for children .
To us Americans , it sounds horrible to think of abandoning or killing your own sick wife or husband or elderly mother or father , but what could those traditional societies do differently ?
They face a cruel situation of no choice .
Their old people had to do it to their own parents , and the old people know what now is going to happen to them .
At the opposite extreme in treatment of the elderly , the happy extreme , are the New Guinea farming societies where Ive been doing my fieldwork for the past 50 years , and most other sedentary traditional societies around the world .
In those societies , older people are cared for .
They are fed . They remain valuable .
And they continue to live in the same hut or else in a nearby hut near their children , relatives and lifelong friends .
There are two main sets of reasons for this variation among societies in their treatment of old people .
The variation depends especially on the usefulness of old people and on the societys values .
First , as regards usefulness , older people continue to perform useful services .
One use of older people in traditional societies is that they often are still effective at producing food .
Another traditional usefulness of older people is that they are capable of babysitting their grandchildren , thereby freeing up their own adult children , the parents of those grandchildren , to go hunting and gathering food for the grandchildren .
Still another traditional value of older people is in making tools , weapons , baskets , pots and textiles .
In fact , theyre usually the people who are best at it .
Older people usually are the leaders of traditional societies , and the people most knowledgeable about politics , medicine , religion , songs and dances .
Finally , older people in traditional societies have a huge significance that would never occur to us in our modern , literate societies , where our sources of information are books and the Internet .
In contrast , in traditional societies without writing , older people are the repositories of information .
Its their knowledge that spells the difference between survival and death for their whole society in a time of crisis caused by rare events for which only the oldest people alive have had experience .
Those , then , are the ways in which older people are useful in traditional societies .
Their usefulness varies and contributes to variation in the societys treatment of the elderly .
The other set of reasons for variation in the treatment of the elderly is the societys cultural values .
For example , theres particular emphasis on respect for the elderly in East Asia , associated with Confucius doctrine of filial piety , which means obedience , respect and support for elderly parents .
Cultural values that emphasize respect for older people contrast with the low status of the elderly in the U.S .
Older Americans are at a big disadvantage in job applications .
Theyre at a big disadvantage in hospitals .
Our hospitals have an explicit policy called age - based allocation of healthcare resources .
That sinister expression means that if hospital resources are limited , for example if only one donor heart becomes available for transplant , or if a surgeon has time to operate on only a certain number of patients , American hospitals have an explicit policy of giving preference to younger patients over older patients on the grounds that younger patients are considered more valuable to society because they have more years of life ahead of them , even though the younger patients have fewer years of valuable life experience behind them .
There are several reasons for this low status of the elderly in the U.S .
One is our Protestant work ethic which places high value on work , so older people who are no longer working arent respected .
Another reason is our American emphasis on the virtues of self - reliance and independence , so we instinctively look down on older people who are no longer self - reliant and independent .
Still a third reason is our American cult of youth , which shows up even in our advertisements .
Ads for Coca - Cola and beer always depict smiling young people , even though old as well as young people buy and drink Coca - Cola and beer .
Just think , whats the last time you saw a Coke or beer ad depicting smiling people 85 years old ? Never .
Instead , the only American ads featuring white - haired old people are ads for retirement homes and pension planning .
Well , what has changed in the status of the elderly today compared to their status in traditional societies ?
There have been a few changes for the better and more changes for the worse .
Big changes for the better include the fact that today we enjoy much longer lives , much better health in our old age , and much better recreational opportunities .
Another change for the better is that we now have specialized retirement facilities and programs to take care of old people .
Changes for the worse begin with the cruel reality that we now have more old people and fewer young people than at any time in the past .
That means that all those old people are more of a burden on the few young people , and that each old person has less individual value .
Another big change for the worse in the status of the elderly is the breaking of social ties with age , because older people , their children , and their friends , all move and scatter independently of each other many times during their lives .
We Americans move on the average every five years .
Hence our older people are likely to end up living distant from their children and the friends of their youth .
Yet another change for the worse in the status of the elderly is formal retirement from the workforce , carrying with it a loss of work friendships and a loss of the self - esteem associated with work .
Perhaps the biggest change for the worse is that our elderly are objectively less useful than in traditional societies .
Widespread literacy means that they are no longer useful as repositories of knowledge .
When we want some information , we look it up in a book or we Google it instead of finding some old person to ask .
The slow pace of technological change in traditional societies means that what someone learns there as a child is still useful when that person is old , but the rapid pace of technological change today means that what we learn as children is no longer useful 60 years later .
And conversely , we older people are not fluent in the technologies essential for surviving in modern society .
For example , as a 15 - year - old , I was considered outstandingly good at multiplying numbers because I had memorized the multiplication tables and I know how to use logarithms and Im quick at manipulating a slide rule .
Today , though , those skills are utterly useless because any idiot can now multiply eight - digit numbers accurately and instantly with a pocket calculator .
Conversely , I at age 75 am incompetent at skills essential for everyday life .
My familys first TV set in 1948 had only three knobs that I quickly mastered : an on - off switch , a volume knob , and a channel selector knob .
Today , just to watch a program on the TV set in my own house , I have to operate a 41 - button TV remote that utterly defeats me .
I have to telephone my 25 - year - old sons and ask them to talk me through it while I try to push those wretched 41 buttons .
What can we do to improve the lives of the elderly in the U.S . , and to make better use of their value ?
Thats a huge problem .
In my remaining four minutes today , I can offer just a few suggestions .
One value of older people is that they are increasingly useful as grandparents for offering high - quality childcare to their grandchildren , if they choose to do it , as more young women enter the workforce and as fewer young parents of either gender stay home as full - time caretakers of their children .
Compared to the usual alternatives of paid babysitters and day care centers , grandparents offer superior , motivated , experienced child care .
Theyve already gained experience from raising their own children .
They usually love their grandchildren , and are eager to spend time with them .
Unlike other caregivers , grandparents dont quit their job because they found another job with higher pay looking after another baby .
A second value of older people is paradoxically related to their loss of value as a result of changing world conditions and technology .
At the same time , older people have gained in value today precisely because of their unique experience of living conditions that have now become rare because of rapid change , but that could come back .
For example , only Americans now in their 70s or older today can remember the experience of living through a great depression , the experience of living through a world war , and agonizing whether or not dropping atomic bombs would be more horrible than the likely consequences of not dropping atomic bombs .
Most of our current voters and politicians have no personal experience of any of those things , but millions of older Americans do .
Unfortunately , all of those terrible situations could come back .
Even if they dont come back , we have to be able to plan for them on the basis of the experience of what they were like .
Older people have that experience .
Younger people dont .
The remaining value of older people that Ill mention involves recognizing that while there are many things that older people can no longer do , there are other things that they can do better than younger people .
A challenge for society is to make use of those things that older people are better at doing .
Some abilities , of course , decrease with age .
Those include abilities at tasks requiring physical strength and stamina , ambition , and the power of novel reasoning in a circumscribed situation , such as figuring out the structure of DNA , best left to scientists under the age of 30 .
Conversely , valuable attributes that increase with age include experience , understanding of people and human relationships , ability to help other people without your own ego getting in the way , and interdisciplinary thinking about large databases , such as economics and comparative history , best left to scholars over the age of 60 .
Hence older people are much better than younger people at supervising , administering , advising , strategizing , teaching , synthesizing , and devising long - term plans .
Ive seen this value of older people with so many of my friends in their 60s , 70s , 80s and 90s , who are still active as investment managers , farmers , lawyers and doctors .
In short , many traditional societies make better use of their elderly and give their elderly more satisfying lives than we do in modern , big societies .
Paradoxically nowadays , when we have more elderly people than ever before , living healthier lives and with better medical care than ever before , old age is in some respects more miserable than ever before .
The lives of the elderly are widely recognized as constituting a disaster area of modern American society .
We can surely do better by learning from the lives of the elderly in traditional societies .
But whats true of the lives of the elderly in traditional societies is true of many other features of traditional societies as well .
Of course , Im not advocating that we all give up agriculture and metal tools and return to a hunter - gatherer lifestyle .
There are many obvious respects in which our lives today are far happier than those in small , traditional societies .
To mention just a few examples , our lives are longer , materially much richer , and less plagued by violence than are the lives of people in traditional societies .
But there are also things to be admired about people in traditional societies , and perhaps to be learned from them .
Their lives are usually socially much richer than our lives , although materially poorer .
Their children are more self - confident , more independent , and more socially skilled than are our children .
They think more realistically about dangers than we do .
They almost never die of diabetes , heart disease , stroke , and the other noncommunicable diseases that will be the causes of death of almost all of us in this room today .
Features of the modern lifestyle predispose us to those diseases , and features of the traditional lifestyle protect us against them .
Those are just some examples of what we can learn from traditional societies .
I hope that you will find it as fascinating to read about traditional societies as I found it to live in those societies .
Thank you .
Jae Rhim Lee : My mushroom burial suit
Heres a powerful provocation from artist Jae Rhim Lee . Can we commit our bodies to a cleaner , greener Earth , even after death ? Naturally  -  -  using a special burial suit seeded with pollution - gobbling mushrooms . Yes , this just might be the strangest TEDTalk youll ever see ...
So Im here to explain why Im wearing these ninja pajamas .
And to do that , Id like to talk first about environmental toxins in our bodies .
So some of you may know about the chemical Bisphenol A , BPA .
Its a material hardener and synthetic estrogen thats found in the lining of canned foods and some plastics .
So BPA mimics the bodys own hormones and causes neurological and reproductive problems .
And its everywhere .
A recent study found BPA in 93 percent of people six and older .
But its just one chemical .
The Center for Disease Control in the U.S .
says we have 219 toxic pollutants in our bodies , and this includes preservatives , pesticides and heavy metals like lead and mercury .
To me , this says three things .
First , dont become a cannibal .
Second , we are both responsible for and the victims of our own pollution .
And third , our bodies are filters and storehouses for environmental toxins .
So what happens to all these toxins when we die ?
The short answer is : They return to the environment in one way or another , continuing the cycle of toxicity .
But our current funeral practices make the situation much worse .
If youre cremated , all those toxins I mentioned are released into the atmosphere .
And this includes 5,000 pounds of mercury from our dental fillings alone every year .
And in a traditional American funeral , a dead body is covered with fillers and cosmetics to make it look alive .
Its then pumped with toxic formaldehyde to slow decomposition  -  -  a practice which causes respiratory problems and cancer in funeral personnel .
So by trying to preserve our dead bodies , we deny death , poison the living and further harm the environment .
Green or natural burials , which dont use embalming , are a step in the right direction , but they dont address the existing toxins in our bodies .
I think theres a better solution .
Im an artist , so Id like to offer a modest proposal at the intersection of art , science and culture .
The Infinity Burial Project , an alternative burial system that uses mushrooms to decompose and clean toxins in bodies .
The Infinity Burial Project began a few years ago with a fantasy to create the Infinity Mushroom  -  -  a new hybrid mushroom that would decompose bodies , clean the toxins and deliver nutrients to plant roots , leaving clean compost .
But I learned its nearly impossible to create a new hybrid mushroom .
I also learned that some of our tastiest mushrooms can clean environmental toxins in soil .
So I thought maybe I could train an army of toxin - cleaning edible mushrooms to eat my body .
So today , Im collecting what I shed or slough off  -  -  my hair , skin and nails  -  -  and Im feeding these to edible mushrooms .
As the mushrooms grow , I pick the best feeders to become Infinity Mushrooms .
Its a kind of imprinting and selective breeding process for the afterlife .
So when I die , the Infinity Mushrooms will recognize my body and be able to eat it .
All right , so for some of you , this may be really , really out there .
Just a little .
I realize this is not the kind of relationship that we usually aspire to have with our food .
We want to eat , not be eaten by , our food .
But as I watch the mushrooms grow and digest my body , I imagine the Infinity Mushroom as a symbol of a new way of thinking about death and the relationship between my body and the environment .
See for me , cultivating the Infinity Mushroom is more than just scientific experimentation or gardening or raising a pet , its a step towards accepting the fact that someday I will die and decay .
Its also a step towards taking responsibility for my own burden on the planet .
Growing a mushroom is also part of a larger practice of cultivating decomposing organisms called decompiculture , a concept that was developed by an entomologist , Timothy Myles .
The Infinity Mushroom is a subset of decompiculture Im calling body decompiculture and toxin remediation  -  -  the cultivation of organisms that decompose and clean toxins in bodies .
And now about these ninja pajamas .
Once its completed , I plan to integrate the Infinity Mushrooms into a number of objects .
First , a burial suit infused with mushroom spores , the Mushroom Death Suit .
Im wearing the second prototype of this burial suit .
Its covered with a crocheted netting that is embedded with mushroom spores .
The dendritic pattern you see mimics the growth of mushroom mycelia , which are the equivalent of plant roots .
Im also making a decompiculture kit , a cocktail of capsules that contain Infinity Mushroom spores and other elements that speed decomposition and toxin remediation .
These capsules are embedded in a nutrient - rich jelly , a kind of second skin , which dissolves quickly and becomes baby food for the growing mushrooms .
So I plan to finish the mushroom and decompiculture kit in the next year or two , and then Id like to begin testing them , first with expired meat from the market and then with human subjects .
And believe it or not , a few people have offered to donate their bodies to the project to be eaten by mushrooms .
What Ive learned from talking to these folks is that we share a common desire to understand and accept death and to minimize the impact of our death on the environment .
I wanted to cultivate this perspective just like the mushrooms , so I formed the Decompiculture Society , a group of people called decompinauts who actively explore their postmortem options , seek death acceptance and cultivate decomposing organisms like the Infinity Mushroom .
The Decompiculture Society shares a vision of a cultural shift , from our current culture of death denial and body preservation to one of decompiculture , a radical acceptance of death and decomposition .
Accepting death means accepting that we are physical beings who are intimately connected to the environment , as the research on environmental toxins confirms .
And the saying goes , we came from dust and will return to dust .
And once we understand that were connected to the environment , we see that the survival of our species depends on the survival of the planet .
I believe this is the beginning of true environmental responsibility .
Thank you .
Jonathan Klein : Photos that changed the world
Photographs do more than document history  -  -  they make it . At TED University , Jonathan Klein of Getty Images shows some of the most iconic , and talks about what happens when a generation sees an image so powerful it cant look away  -  -  or back .
In my industry , we believe that images can change the world .
Okay , were naive , were bright - eyed and bushy - tailed .
The truth is that we know that the images themselves dont change the world , but were also aware that , since the beginning of photography , images have provoked reactions in people , and those reactions have caused change to happen .
So lets begin with a group of images .
Id be extremely surprised if you didnt recognize many or most of them .
Theyre best described as iconic : so iconic , perhaps , theyre cliches .
In fact , theyre so well - known that you might even recognize them in a slightly or somewhat different form .
But I think were looking for something more .
Were looking for something more .
Were looking for images that shine an uncompromising light on crucial issues , images that transcend borders , that transcend religions , images that provoke us to step up and do something  -  -  in other words , to act .
Well , this image youve all seen .
It changed our view of the physical world .
We had never seen our planet from this perspective before .
Many people credit a lot of the birth of the environmental movement to our seeing the planet like this for the first time  -  -  its smallness , its fragility .
Forty years later , this group , more than most , are well aware of the destructive power that our species can wield over our environment .
And at last , we appear to be doing something about it .
This destructive power takes many different forms .
For example , these images taken by Brent Stirton in the Congo .
These gorillas were murdered , some would even say crucified , and unsurprisingly , they sparked international outrage .
Most recently , weve been tragically reminded of the destructive power of nature itself with the recent earthquake in Haiti .
Well , I think what is far worse is mans destructive power over man .
Samuel Pisar , an Auschwitz survivor , said , and Ill quote him ,  The Holocaust teaches us that nature , even in its cruelest moments , is benign in comparison with man , when he loses his moral compass and his reason . 
Theres another kind of crucifixion .
The horrifying images from Abu Ghraib as well as the images from Guantanamo had a profound impact .
The publication of those images , as opposed to the images themselves , caused a government to change its policies .
Some would argue that it is those images that did more to fuel the insurgency in Iraq than virtually any other single act .
Furthermore , those images forever removed the so - called moral high ground of the occupying forces .
Lets go back a little .
In the 1960s and 1970s , the Vietnam War was basically shown in Americas living rooms day in , day out .
News photos brought people face to face with the victims of the war : a little girl burned by napalm , a student killed by the National Guard at Kent State University in Ohio during a protest .
In fact , these images became the voices of protest themselves .
Now , images have power to shed light of understanding on suspicion , ignorance , and in particular  -  -  Ive given a lot of talks on this but Ill just show one image  -  -  the issue of HIV / AIDS .
In the 1980s , the stigmatization of people with the disease was an enormous barrier to even discussing or addressing it .
A simple act , in 1987 , of the most famous woman in the world , the Princess of Wales , touching an HIV / AIDS infected baby did a great deal , especially in Europe , to stop that .
She , better than most , knew the power of an image .
So when we are confronted by a powerful image , we all have a choice : We can look away , or we can address the image .
Thankfully , when these photos appeared in The Guardian in 1998 , they put a lot of focus and attention and , in the end , a lot of money towards the Sudan famine relief efforts .
Did the images change the world ?
No , but they had a major impact .
Images often push us to question our core beliefs and our responsibilities to each other .
We all saw those images after Katrina , and I think for millions of people they had a very strong impact .
And I think its very unlikely that they were far from the minds of Americans when they went to vote in November 2008 .
Unfortunately , some very important images are deemed too graphic or disturbing for us to see them .
Ill show you one photo here , and its a photo by Eugene Richards of an Iraq War veteran from an extraordinary piece of work , which has never been published , called War Is Personal .
But images dont need to be graphic in order to remind us of the tragedy of war .
John Moore set up this photo at Arlington Cemetery .
After all the tense moments of conflict in all the conflict zones of the world , theres one photograph from a much quieter place that haunts me still , much more than the others .
Ansel Adams said , and Im going to disagree with him ,  You dont take a photograph , you make it . 
In my view , its not the photographer who makes the photo , its you .
We bring to each image our own values , our own belief systems , and as a result of that , the image resonates with us .
My company has 70 million images .
I have one image in my office .
Here it is .
I hope that the next time you see an image that sparks something in you , youll better understand why , and I know that speaking to this audience , youll definitely do something about it .
And thank you to all the photographers .
John Hunter : Teaching with the World Peace Game
John Hunter puts all the problems of the world on a 4x5 plywood board  -  -  and lets his 4th - graders solve them . At TED2011 , he explains how his World Peace Game engages schoolkids , and why the complex lessons it teaches  -  -  spontaneous , and always surprising  -  -  go further than classroom lectures can .
Im very fortunate to be here .
I feel so fortunate .
Ive been so impressed by the kindness expressed to me .
I called my wife Leslie , and I said ,  You know , theres so many good people trying to do so much good .
It feels like Ive landed in a colony of angels . 
Its a true feeling .
But let me get to the talk  -  -  I see the clock is running .
Im a public school teacher , and I just want to share a story of my superintendent .
Her name is Pam Moran in Albemarle County , Virginia , the foothills of the Blue Ridge Mountains .
And shes a very high - tech superintendent .
She uses smart boards , she blogs , she Tweets , she does Facebook , she does all this sort of high - tech stuff .
Shes a technology leader and instructional leader .
But in her office , theres this old wooden , weather - worn table , kitchen table  -  -  peeling green paint , its kind of rickety .
And I said ,  Pam , youre such a modern , cutting - edge person .
Why is this old table in your office ? 
And she told me , she said ,  You know , I grew up in Southwestern Virginia , in the coal mines and the farmlands of rural Virginia , and this table was in my grandfathers kitchen .
And wed come in from playing , hed come in from plowing and working , and wed sit around that table every night .
And as I grew up , I heard so much knowledge and so many insights and so much wisdom come out around this table , I began to call it the wisdom table .
And when he passed on , I took this table with me and brought it to my office , and it reminds me of him .
It reminds me of what goes on around an empty space sometimes . 
The project Im going to tell you about is called the World Peace Game , and essentially it is also an empty space .
And Id like to think of it as a 21st century wisdom table , really .
It all started back in 1977 .
I was a young man , and I had been dropping in and out of college .
And my parents were very patient , but I had been doing intermittent sojourns to India on a mystical quest .
And I remember the last time I came back from India  -  -  in my long white flowing robes and my big beard and my John Lennon glasses  -  -  and I said to my father ,  Dad , I think Ive just about found spiritual enlightenment . 
He said ,  Well theres one more thing you need to find . 
I said ,  What is that , dad ?   A job . 
And so they pleaded with me to get a degree in something .
So I got a degree and it turned out to be education .
It was an experimental education program .
It could have been dentistry , but the word  experimental  was in it , and so thats what I had to go for .
And I went in for a job interview in the Richmond Public Schools in Virginia , the capital city , bought a three - piece suit  -  -  my concession to convention  -  -  kept my long beard and my afro and my platform shoes  -  -  at the time it was the 70s  -  -  and I walked in , and I sat down and had an interview .
And I guess they were hard up for teachers because the supervisor , her name was Anna Aro , said I had the job teaching gifted children .
And I was so shocked , so stunned , I got up and said ,  Well , thank you , but what do I do ? 
Gifted education hadnt really taken hold too much .
There werent really many materials or things to use .
And I said ,  What do I do ? 
And her answer shocked me . It stunned me .
Her answer set the template for the entire career I was to have after that .
She said ,  What do you want to do ? 
And that question cleared the space .
There was no program directive , no manual to follow , no standards in gifted education in that way .
And she cleared such a space that I endeavored from then on to clear a space for my students , an empty space , whereby they could create and make meaning out of their own understanding .
So this happened in 1978 , and I was teaching many years later , and a friend of mine introduced me to a young filmmaker .
His name is Chris Farina .
Chris Farina is here today at his own cost .
Chris , could you stand up and let them see you  -  -  a young , visionary filmmaker whos made a film .
This film is called  World Peace and Other 4th Grade Achievements . 
He proposed the film to me  -  -  its a great title .
He proposed the film to me , and I said ,  Yeah , maybe itll be on local TV , and we can say hi to our friends . 
But the film has really gone places .
Now its still in debt , but Chris has managed , through his own sacrifice , to get this film out .
So we made a film and it turns out to be more than a story about me , more than a story about one teacher .
Its a story thats a testament to teaching and teachers .
And its a beautiful thing .
And the strange thing is , when I watch the film  -  -  I have the eerie sensation of seeing it  -  -  I saw myself literally disappear .
What I saw was my teachers coming through me .
I saw my geometry teacher in high school , Mr. Rucells wry smile under his handlebar mustache .
Thats the smile I use  -  -  thats his smile .
I saw Jan Polos flashing eyes .
And they werent flashing in anger , they were flashing in love , intense love for her students .
And I have that kind of flash sometimes .
And I saw Miss Ethel J. Banks who wore pearls and high - heels to elementary school every day .
And you know , she had that old - school teacher stare .
You know the one .
 And Im not even talking about you behind me , because Ive got eyes in the back of my head . 
You know that teacher ?
I didnt use that stare very often , but I do have it in my repertoire .
And Miss Banks was there as a great mentor for me .
And then I saw my own parents , my first teachers .
My father , very inventive , spatial thinker .
Thats my brother Malcolm there on the right .
And my mother , who taught me in fourth grade in segregated schools in Virginia , who was my inspiration .
And really , I feel as though , when I see the film  -  -  I have a gesture she does , like this  -  -  I feel like I am a continuation of her gesture .
I am one of her teaching gestures .
And the beautiful thing was , I got to teach my daughter in elementary school , Madeline .
And so that gesture of my mothers continues through many generations .
Its an amazing feeling to have that lineage .
And so Im here standing on the shoulders of many people .
Im not here alone .
There are many people on this stage right now .
And so this World Peace Game Id like to tell you about .
It started out like this : its just a four - foot by five - foot plywood board in an inner - city urban school , 1978 .
I was creating a lesson for students on Africa .
We put all the problems of the world there , and I thought , lets let them solve it .
I didnt want to lecture or have just book reading .
I wanted to have them be immersed and learn the feeling of learning through their bodies .
So I thought , well they like to play games .
Ill make something  -  -  I didnt say interactive ; we didnt have that term in 1978  -  -  but something interactive .
And so we made the game , and it has since evolved to a four - foot by four - foot by four - foot Plexiglass structure .
And it has four Plexiglass layers .
Theres an outer space layer with black holes and satellites and research satellites and asteroid mining .
Theres an air and space level with clouds that are big puffs of cotton we push around and territorial air spaces and air forces , a ground and sea level with thousands of game pieces on it  -  -  even an undersea level with submarines and undersea mining .
There are four countries around the board .
The kids make up the names of the countries  -  -  some are rich ; some are poor .
They have different assets , commercial and military .
And each country has a cabinet .
Theres a Prime Minister , Secretary of State , Minister of Defense and a CFO , or Comptroller .
I choose the Prime Minister based on my relationship with them .
I offer them the job , they can turn it down , and then they choose their own cabinet .
Theres a World Bank , arms dealers and a United Nations .
Theres also a weather goddess who controls a random stock market and random weather .
Thats not all .
And then theres a 13 - page crisis document with 50 interlocking problems .
So that , if one thing changes , everything else changes .
I throw them into this complex matrix , and they trust me because we have a deep , rich relationship together .
And so with all these crises , we have  -  -  lets see  -  -  ethnic and minority tensions ; we have chemical and nuclear spills , nuclear proliferation .
Theres oil spills , environmental disasters , water rights disputes , breakaway republics , famine , endangered species and global warming .
If Al Gore is here , Im going to send my fourth - graders from Agnor - Hurt and Venable schools to you because they solved global warming in a week .
And theyve done it several times too .
So I also have in the game a saboteur  -  -  some child  -  -  its basically a troublemaker  -  -  and I have my troublemaker put to use because they , on the surface , are trying to save the world and their position in the game .
But theyre also trying to undermine everything in the game .
And they do it secretly through misinformation and ambiguities and irrelevancies , trying to cause everyone to think more deeply .
The saboteur is there , and we also read from Sun Tzus  The Art of War . 
Fourth - graders understand it  -  -  nine years old  -  -  and they handle that and use that to understand how to , not follow  -  -  at first they do  -  -  the paths to power and destruction , the path to war .
They learn to overlook short - sighted reactions and impulsive thinking , to think in a long - term , more consequential way .
Stewart Brand is here , and one of the ideas for this game came from him with a CoEvolution Quarterly article on a peace force .
And in the game , sometimes students actually form a peace force .
Im just a clock watcher .
Im just a clarifier . Im just a facilitator .
The students run the game .
I have no chance to make any policy whatsoever once they start playing .
So Ill just share with you ...
Boy : The World Peace Game is serious .
Youre actually getting taught something like how to take care of the world .
See , Mr. Hunter is doing that because he says his time has messed up a lot , and hes trying to tell us how to fix that problem .
John Hunter : I offered them a  -  -  Actually , I cant tell them anything because I dont know the answer .
And I admit the truth to them right up front : I dont know .
And because I dont know , theyve got to dig up the answer .
And so I apologize to them as well .
I say ,  Im so sorry , boys and girls , but the truth is we have left this world to you in such a sad and terrible shape , and we hope you can fix it for us , and maybe this game will help you learn how to do it . 
Its a sincere apology , and they take it very seriously .
Now you may be wondering what all this complexity looks like .
Well when we have the game start , heres what you see .
JH : All right , were going into negotiations as of now . Go .
JH : My question to you is , whos in charge of that classroom ?
Its a serious question : who is really in charge ?
Ive learned to cede control of the classroom over to the students over time .
Theres a trust and an understanding and a dedication to an ideal that I simply dont have to do what I thought I had to do as a beginning teacher : control every conversation and response in the classroom .
Its impossible . Their collective wisdom is much greater than mine , and I admit it to them openly .
So Ill just share with you some stories very quickly of some magical things that have happened .
In this game we had a little girl , and she was the Defense Minister of the poorest nation .
And the Defense Minister  -  -  she had the tank corps and Air Force and so forth .
And she was next door to a very wealthy , oil - rich neighbor .
Without provocation , suddenly she attacked , against her Prime Ministers orders , the next - door neighbors oil fields .
She marched into the oil field reserves , surrounded it , without firing a shot , and secured it and held it .
And that neighbor was unable to conduct any military operations because their fuel supply was locked up .
We were all upset with her ,  Why are you doing this ?
This is the World Peace Game . What is wrong with you ? 
This was a little girl and , at nine years old , she held her pieces and said ,  I know what Im doing . 
To her girlfriends she said that .
Thats a breach there .
And we learned in this , you dont really ever want to cross a nine year - old girl with tanks .
They are the toughest opponents .
And we were very upset .
I thought I was failing as a teacher . Why would she do this ?
But come to find out , a few game days later  -  -  and there are turns where we take negotiation from a team  -  -  actually theres a negotiation period with all teams , and each team takes a turn , then we go back in negotiation , around and around , so each turn around is one game day .
So a few game days later it came to light that we found out this major country was planning a military offensive to dominate the entire world .
Had they had their fuel supplies , they would have done it .
She was able to see the vectors and trend lines and intentions long before any of us and understand what was going to happen and made a philosophical decision to attack in a peace game .
Now she used a small war to avert a larger war , so we stopped and had a very good philosophical discussion about whether that was right , conditional good , or not right .
Thats the kind of thinking that we put them in , the situations .
I could not have designed that in teaching it .
It came about spontaneously through their collective wisdom .
Another example , a beautiful thing happened .
We have a letter in the game .
If youre a military commander and you wage troops  -  -  the little plastic toys on the board  -  -  and you lose them , I put in a letter .
You have to write a letter to their parents  -  -  the fictional parents of your fictional troops  -  -  explaining what happened and offering your condolences .
So you have a little bit more thought before you commit to combat .
And so we had this situation come up  -  -  last summer actually , at Agnor - Hurt School in Albemarle County  -  -  and one of our military commanders got up to read that letter and one of the other kids said ,  Mr. Hunter , lets ask  -  -  theres a parent over there . 
There was a parent visiting that day , just sitting in the back of the room .
 Lets ask that mom to read the letter .
Itll be more realer if she reads it . 
So we did , we asked her , and she gamely picked up the letter .
 Sure .  She started reading . She read one sentence .
She read two sentences .
By the third sentence , she was in tears .
I was in tears .
Everybody understood that when we lose somebody , the winners are not gloating .
We all lose .
And it was an amazing occurrence and an amazing understanding .
Ill show you what my friend David says about this .
Hes been in many battles .
David : Weve really had enough of people attacking .
I mean , weve been lucky  most of  the time .
But now Im feeling really weird because Im living what Sun Tzu said one week .
One week he said ,  Those who go into battle and win will want to go back , and those who lose in battle will want to go back and win . 
And so Ive been winning battles , so Im going into battles , more battles .
And I think its sort of weird to be living what Sun Tzu said .
JH : I get chills every time I see that .
Thats the kind of engagement you want to have happen .
And I cant design that , I cant plan that , and I cant even test that .
But its self - evident assessment .
We know thats an authentic assessment of learning .
We have a lot of data , but I think sometimes we go beyond data with the real truth of whats going on .
So Ill just share a third story .
This is about my friend Brennan .
We had played the game one session after school for many weeks , about seven weeks , and we had essentially solved all 50 of the interlocking crises .
The way the game is won is all 50 problems have to be solved and every countrys asset value has to be increased above its starting point .
Some are poor , some are wealthy . There are billions .
The World Bank president was a third - grader one time .
He says ,  How many zeros in a trillion ? Ive got to calculate that right away . 
But he was setting fiscal policy in that game for high school players who were playing with him .
So the team that was the poorest had gotten even poorer .
There was no way they could win .
And we were approaching four oclock , our cut - off time  -  -  there was about a minute left  -  -  and despair just settled over the room .
I thought , Im failing as a teacher .
I should have gotten it so they could have won .
They shouldnt be failing like this .
Ive failed them .
And I was just feeling so sad and dejected .
And suddenly , Brennan walked over to my chair and he grabbed the bell , the bell I ring to signal a change or a reconvening of cabinets , and he ran back to his seat , rang the bell .
Everybody ran to his chair : there was screaming ; there was yelling , waving of their dossiers .
They get these dossiers full of secret documents .
They were gesticulating ; they were running around .
I didnt know what they were doing . Id lost control of my classroom .
Principal walks in , Im out of a job .
The parents were looking in the window .
And Brennan runs back to his seat . Everybody runs back to their seat .
He rings the bell again . He says ,  We have   -  -  and theres 12 seconds left on the clock  -  -   we have , all nations , pooled all our funds together .
And weve got 600 billion dollars .
Were going to offer it as a donation to this poor country .
And if they accept it , itll raise their asset value and we can win the game .
Will you accept it ? 
And there are three seconds left on the clock .
Everybody looks at this prime minister of that country , and he says ,  Yes . 
And the game is won .
Spontaneous compassion that could not be planned for , that was unexpected and unpredictable .
Every game we play is different .
Some games are more about social issues , some are more about economic issues .
Some games are more about warfare .
But I dont try to deny them that reality of being human .
I allow them to go there and , through their own experience , learn , in a bloodless way , how not to do what they consider to be the wrong thing .
And they find out what is right their own way , their own selves .
And so in this game , Ive learned so much from it , but I would say that if only they could pick up a critical thinking tool or creative thinking tool from this game and leverage something good for the world , they may save us all .
If only .
And on behalf of all of my teachers on whose shoulders Im standing , thank you . Thank you . Thank you .
Nic Marks : The Happy Planet Index
Statistician Nic Marks asks why we measure a nations success by its productivity  -  -  instead of by the happiness and well - being of its people . He introduces the Happy Planet Index , which tracks national well - being against resource use . Which countries rank highest in the HPI ? You might be surprised .
Martin Luther King did not say ,  I have a nightmare ,  when he inspired the civil rights movements .
He said ,  I have a dream . 
And I have a dream .
I have a dream that we can stop thinking that the future will be a nightmare , and this is going to be a challenge , because , if you think of every major blockbusting film of recent times , nearly all of its visions for humanity are apocalyptic .
I think this film is one of the hardest watches of modern times ,  The Road . 
Its a beautiful piece of filmmaking , but everything is desolate , everything is dead .
And just a father and son trying to survive , walking along the road .
And I think the environmental movement of which I am a part of has been complicit in creating this vision of the future .
For too long , we have peddled a nightmarish vision of whats going to happen .
We have focused on the worst - case scenario .
We have focused on the problems .
And we have not thought enough about the solutions .
Weve used fear , if you like , to grab peoples attention .
And any psychologist will tell you that fear in the organism is linked to flight mechanism .
Its part of the fight and flight mechanism , that when an animal is frightened  -  -  think of a deer .
A deer freezes very , very still , poised to run away .
And I think thats what were doing when were asking people to engage with our agenda around environmental degradation and climate change .
People are freezing and running away because were using fear .
And I think the environmental movement has to grow up and start to think about what progress is .
What would it be like to be improving the human lot ?
And one of the problems that we face , I think , is that the only people that have cornered the market in terms of progress is a financial definition of what progress is , an economic definition of what progress is  -  -  that somehow , if we get the right numbers to go up , were going to be better off , whether thats on the stock market , whether thats with GDP and economic growth , that somehow life is going to get better .
This is somehow appealing to human greed instead of fear  -  -  that more is better .
Come on . In the Western world , we have enough .
Maybe some parts of the world dont , but we have enough .
And weve know for a long time that this is not a good measure of the welfare of nations .
In fact , the architect of our national accounting system , Simon Kuznets , in the 1930s , said that ,  A nations welfare can scarcely be inferred from their national income . 
But weve created a national accounting system which is firmly based on production and producing stuff .
And indeed , this is probably historical , and it had its time .
In the second World War , we needed to produce a lot of stuff .
And indeed , we were so successful at producing certain types of stuff that we destroyed a lot of Europe , and we had to rebuild it afterwards .
And so our national accounting system became fixated on what we can produce .
But as early as 1968 , this visionary man , Robert Kennedy , at the start of his ill - fated presidential campaign , gave the most eloquent deconstruction of gross national product that ever has been .
And he finished his talk with the phrase , that ,  The gross national product measures everything except that which makes life worthwhile . 
How crazy is that ? That our measure of progress , our dominant measure of progress in society , is measuring everything except that which makes life worthwhile ?
I believe , if Kennedy was alive today , he would be asking statisticians such as myself to go out and find out what makes life worthwhile .
Hed be asking us to redesign our national accounting system to be based upon such important things as social justice , sustainability and peoples well - being .
And actually , social scientists have already gone out and asked these questions around the world .
This is from a global survey .
Its asking people , what do they want .
And unsurprisingly , people all around the world say that what they want is happiness , for themselves , for their families , their children , their communities .
Okay , they think money is slightly important .
Its there , but its not nearly as important as happiness , and its not nearly as important as love .
We all need to love and be loved in life .
Its not nearly as important as health .
We want to be healthy and live a full life .
These seem to be natural human aspirations .
Why are statisticians not measuring these ?
Why are we not thinking of the progress of nations in these terms , instead of just how much stuff we have ?
And really , this is what Ive done with my adult life  -  -  is think about how do we measure happiness , how do we measure well - being , how can we do that within environmental limits .
And we created , at the organization that I work for , the New Economics Foundation , something we call the Happy Planet Index , because we think people should be happy and the planet should be happy .
Why dont we create a measure of progress that shows that ?
And what we do , is we say that the ultimate outcome of a nation is how successful is it at creating happy and healthy lives for its citizens .
That should be the goal of every nation on the planet .
But we have to remember that theres a fundamental input to that , and that is how many of the planets resources we use .
We all have one planet . We all have to share it .
It is the ultimate scarce resource , the one planet that we share .
And economics is very interested in scarcity .
When it has a scarce resource that it wants to turn into a desirable outcome , it thinks in terms of efficiency .
It thinks in terms of how much bang do we get for our buck .
And this is a measure of how much well - being we get for our planetary resource use .
It is an efficiency measure .
And probably the easiest way to show you that , is to show you this graph .
Running horizontally along the graph , is  ecological footprint ,  which is a measure of how much resources we use and how much pressure we put on the planet .
More is bad .
Running vertically upwards , is a measure called  happy life years . 
Its about the well - being of nations .
Its like a happiness adjusted life - expectancy .
Its like quality and quantity of life in nations .
And the yellow dot there you see , is the global average .
Now , theres a huge array of nations around that global average .
To the top right of the graph , are countries which are doing reasonably well and producing well - being , but theyre using a lot of planet to get there .
They are the U.S . A . , other Western countries going across in those triangles and a few Gulf states in there actually .
Conversely , at the bottom left of the graph , are countries that are not producing much well - being  -  -  typically , sub - Saharan Africa .
In Hobbesian terms , life is short and brutish there .
The average life expectancy in many of these countries is only 40 years .
Malaria , HIV / AIDS are killing a lot of people in these regions of the world .
But now for the good news !
There are some countries up there , yellow triangles , that are doing better than global average , that are heading up towards the top left of the graph .
This is an aspirational graph .
We want to be top left , where good lives dont cost the earth .
Theyre Latin American .
The country on its own up at the top is a place I havent been to .
Maybe some of you have .
Costa Rica .
Costa Rica  -  -  average life expectancy is 78 - and - a - half years .
That is longer than in the USA .
They are , according to the latest Gallup world poll , the happiest nation on the planet  -  -  than anybody ; more than Switzerland and Denmark .
They are the happiest place .
They are doing that on a quarter of the resources that are used typically in  the  Western world  -  -  a quarter of the resources .
Whats going on there ?
Whats happening in Costa Rica ?
We can look at some of the data .
99 percent of their electricity comes from renewable resources .
Their government is one of the first to commit to be carbon neutral by 2021 .
They abolished the army in 1949  -  -  1949 .
And they invested in social programs  -  -  health and education .
They have one of the highest literacy rates in Latin America and in the world .
And they have that Latin vibe , dont they .
They have the social connectedness .
The challenge is , that possibly  -  -  and the thing we might have to think about  -  -  is that the future might not be North American , might not be Western European .
It might be Latin American .
And the challenge , really , is to pull the global average up here .
Thats what we need to do .
And if were going to do that , we need to pull countries from the bottom , and we need to pull countries from the right of the graph .
And then were starting to create a happy planet .
Thats one way of looking at it .
Another way of looking at it is looking at time trends .
We dont have good data going back for every country in the world , but for some of the richest countries , the OECD group , we do .
And this is the trend in well - being over that time , a small increase , but this is the trend in ecological footprint .
And so in strict happy - planet methodology , weve become less efficient at turning our ultimate scarce resource into the outcome we want to .
And the point really is , is that I think , probably everybody in this room would like society to get to 2050 without an apocalyptic something happening .
Its actually not very long away .
Its half a human lifetime away .
A child entering school today will be my age in 2050 .
This is not the very distant future .
This is what the U.K . government target on carbon and greenhouse emissions looks like .
And I put it to you , that is not business as usual .
That is changing our business .
That is changing the way we create our organizations , we do our government policy and we live our lives .
And the point is , we need to carry on increasing well - being .
No one can go to the polls and say that quality of life is going to reduce .
None of us , I think , want human progress to stop .
I think we want it to carry on .
I think we want the lot of humanity to keep on increasing .
And I think this is where climate change skeptics and deniers come in .
I think this is what they want . They want quality of life to keep increasing .
They want to hold on to what theyve got .
And if were going to engage them , I think thats what weve got to do .
And that means we have to really increase efficiency even more .
Now thats all very easy to draw graphs and things like that , but the point is we need to turn those curves .
And this is where I think we can take a leaf out of systems theory , systems engineers , where they create feedback loops , put the right information at the right point of time .
Human beings are very motivated by the  now . 
You put a smart meter in your home , and you see how much electricity youre using right now , how much its costing you , your kids go around and turn the lights off pretty quickly .
What would that look like for society ?
Why is it , on the radio news every evening , I hear the FTSE 100 , the Dow Jones , the dollar pound ratio  -  -  I dont even know which way the dollar pound ratio should go to be good news .
And why do I hear that ?
Why dont I hear how much energy Britain used yesterday , or American used yesterday ?
Did we meet our three percent annual target on reducing carbon emissions ?
Thats how you create a collective goal .
You put it out there into the media and start thinking about it .
And we need positive feedback loops for increasing well - being At a government level , they might create national accounts of well - being .
At a business level , you might look at the well - being of your employees , which we know is really linked to creativity , which is linked to innovation , and were going to need a lot of innovation to deal with those environmental issues .
At a personal level , we need these nudges too .
Maybe we dont quite need the data , but we need reminders .
In the U.K . , we have a strong public health message on five fruit and vegetables a day and how much exercise we should do  -  -  never my best thing .
What are these for happiness ?
What are the five things that you should do every day to be happier ?
We did a project for the Government Office of Science a couple of years ago , a big program called the Foresight program  -  -  lots and lots of people  -  -  involved lots of experts  -  -  everything evidence based  -  -  a huge tome .
But a piece of work we did was on : what five positive actions can you do to improve well - being in your life ?
And the point of these is they are , not quite , the secrets of happiness , but they are things that I think happiness will flow out the side from .
And the first of these is to connect , is that your social relationships are the most important cornerstones of your life .
Do you invest the time with your loved ones that you could do , and energy ?
Keep building them .
The second one is be active .
The fastest way out of a bad mood : step outside , go for a walk , turn the radio on and dance .
Being active is great for our positive mood .
The third one is take notice .
How aware are you of things going on around the world , the seasons changing , people around you ?
Do you notice whats bubbling up for you and trying to emerge ?
Based on a lot of evidence for mindfulness , cognitive behavioral therapy ,  very  strong for our well being .
The fourth is keep learning and keep is important  -  -  learning throughout the whole life course .
Older people who keep learning and are curious , they have much better health outcomes than those who start to close down .
But it doesnt have to be formal learning ; its not knowledge based .
Its more curiosity .
It can be learning to cook a new dish , picking up an instrument you forgot as a child .
Keep learning .
And the final one is that most anti - economic of activities , but give .
Our generosity , our altruism , our compassion , are all hardwired to the reward mechanism in our brain .
We feel good if we give .
You can do an experiment where you give two groups of people a hundred dollars in the morning .
You tell one of them to spend it on themselves and one on other people .
You measure their happiness at the end of the day , those that have gone and spent on other people are much happier that those that spent it on themselves .
And these five ways , which we put onto these handy postcards , I would say , dont have to cost the earth .
They dont have any carbon content .
They dont need a lot of material goods to be satisfied .
And so I think its really quite feasible that happiness does not cost the earth .
Now , Martin Luther King , on the eve of his death , gave an incredible speech .
He said ,  I know there are challenges ahead , there may be trouble ahead , but I fear no one . I dont care .
I have been to the mountain top , and I have seen the Promised Land . 
Now , he was a preacher , but I believe the environmental movement and , in fact , the business community , government , needs to go to the top of the mountain top , and it needs to look out , and it needs to see the Promised Land , or the land of promise , and it needs to have a vision of a world that we all want .
And not only that , we need to create a Great Transition to get there , and we need to pave that great transition with good things .
Human beings want to be happy .
Pave them with the five ways .
And we need to have signposts gathering people together and pointing them  -  -  something like the Happy Planet Index .
And then I believe that we can all create a world we all want , where happiness does not cost the earth .
Shirin Neshat : Art in exile
Iranian - born artist Shirin Neshat explores the paradox of being an artist in exile : a voice for her people , but unable to go home . In her work , she explores Iran pre -  and post - Islamic Revolution , tracing political and societal change through powerful images of women .
The story I wanted to share with you today is my challenge as an Iranian artist , as an Iranian woman artist , as an Iranian woman artist living in exile .
Well , it has its pluses and minuses .
On the dark side , politics doesnt seem to escape people like me .
Every Iranian artist , in one form or another , is political .
Politics have defined our lives .
If youre living in Iran , youre facing censorship , harassment , arrest , torture  -  -  at times , execution .
If youre living outside like me , youre faced with life in exile  -  -  the pain of the longing and the separation from your loved ones and your family .
Therefore , we dont find the moral , emotional , psychological and political space to distance ourselves from the reality of social responsibility .
Oddly enough , an artist such as myself finds herself also in the position of being the voice , the speaker of my people , even if I have , indeed , no access to my own country .
Also , people like myself , were fighting two battles on different grounds .
Were being critical of the West , the perception of the West about our identity  -  -  about the image that is constructed about us , about our women , about our politics , about our religion .
We are there to take pride and insist on respect .
And at the same time , were fighting another battle .
That is our regime , our government  -  -  our atrocious government ,  that  has done every crime in order to stay in power .
Our artists are at risk .
We are in a position of danger .
We pose a threat to the order of the government .
But ironically , this situation has empowered all of us , because we are considered , as artists , central to the cultural , political , social discourse in Iran .
We are there to inspire , to provoke , to mobilize , to bring hope to our people .
We are the reporters of our people , and are communicators to the outside world .
Art is our weapon .
Culture is a form of resistance .
I envy sometimes the artists of the West for their freedom of expression .
For the fact that they can distance themselves from the question of politics .
From the fact that they are only serving one audience , mainly the Western culture .
But also , I worry about the West , because often in this country , in this Western world that we have , culture risks being a form of entertainment .
Our people depend on our artists , and culture is beyond communication .
My journey as an artist started from a very , very personal place .
I did not start to make social commentary about my country .
The first one that you see in front of you is actually when I first returned to Iran after being separated for a good 12 years .
It was after the Islamic Revolution of 1979 .
While I was absent from Iran , the Islamic Revolution had descended on Iran and had entirely transformed the country from Persian to the Islamic culture .
I came mainly to be reunited with my family and to reconnect in a way that I found my place in the society .
But instead , I found a country that was totally ideological and that I didnt recognize anymore .
More so , I became very interested , as I was facing my own personal dilemmas and questions , I became immersed in the study of the Islamic Revolution  -  -  how , indeed , it had incredibly transformed the lives of Iranian women .
I found the subject of Iranian women immensely interesting , in the way the women of Iran , historically , seemed to embody the political transformation .
So in a way , by studying a woman , you can read the structure and the ideology of the country .
So I made a group of work that at once faced my own personal questions in life , and yet it brought my work into a larger discourse  -  -  the subject of martyrdom , the question of those who willingly stand in that intersection of love of God , faith , but violence and crime and cruelty .
For me , this became incredibly important .
And yet , I had an unusual position toward this .
I was an outsider who had come back to Iran to find my place , but I was not in a position to be critical of the government or the ideology of the Islamic Revolution .
This changed slowly as I found my voice and I discovered things that I didnt know I would discover .
So my art became slightly more critical .
My knife became a little sharper .
And I fell into a life in exile .
I am a nomadic artist .
I work in Morocco , in Turkey , in Mexico .
I go everywhere to make believe its Iran .
Now I am making films .
Last year , I finished a film called  Women Without Men . 
 Women Without Men  returns to history , but another part of our Iranian history .
It goes to 1953 when American CIA exercised a coup and removed a democratically elected leader , Dr . Mossadegh .
The book is written by an Iranian woman , Shahrnush Parsipur .
Its a magical realist novel .
This book is banned , and she spent five years in prison .
My obsession with this book , and the reason I made this into a film , is because it at once was addressing the question of being a female  -  -  traditionally , historically in Iran  -  -  and the question of four women who are all looking for an idea of change , freedom and democracy  -  -  while the country of Iran , equally , as if another character , also struggled for an idea of freedom and democracy and independence from the foreign interventions .
I made this film because I felt its important for it to speak to the Westerners about our history as a country .
That all of you seem to remember Iran after the Islamic Revolution .
That Iran was once a secular society , and we had democracy , and this democracy was stolen from us by the American government , by the British government .
This film also speaks to the Iranian people in asking them to return to their history and look at themselves before they were so Islamicized  -  -  in the way we looked , in the way we played music , in the way we had intellectual life .
And most of all , in the way that we fought for democracy .
These are some of the shots actually from my film .
These are some of the images of the coup .
And we made this film in Casablanca , recreating all the shots .
This film tried to find a balance between telling a political story , but also a feminine story .
Being a visual artist , indeed , I am foremost interested to make art  -  -  to make art that transcends politics , religion , the question of feminism , and become an important , timeless , universal work of art .
The challenge I have is how to do that .
How to tell a political story but an allegorical story .
How to move you with your emotions , but also make your mind work .
These are some of the images and the characters of the film .
Now comes the green movement  -  -  the summer of 2009 , as my film is released  -  -  the uprising begins in the streets of Tehran .
What is unbelievably ironic is the period that we tried to depict in the film , the cry for democracy and social justice , repeats itself now again in Tehran .
The green movement significantly inspired the world .
It brought a lot of attention to all those Iranians who stand for basic human rights and struggle for democracy .
What was most significant for me was , once again , the presence of the women .
Theyre absolutely inspirational for me .
If in the Islamic Revolution , the images of the woman portrayed were submissive and didnt have a voice , now we saw a new idea of feminism in the streets of Tehran  -  -  women who were educated , forward thinking , non - traditional , sexually open , fearless and seriously feminist .
These women and those young men united Iranians across the world , inside and outside .
I then discovered why I take so much inspiration from Iranian women .
That , under all circumstances , they have pushed the boundary .
They have confronted the authority .
They have broken every rule in the smallest and the biggest way .
And once again , they proved themselves .
I stand here to say that Iranian women have found a new voice , and their voice is giving me my voice .
And its a great honor to be an Iranian woman and an Iranian artist , even if I have to operate in the West only for now .
Thank you so much .
Beau Lotto : Optical illusions show how we see
Beau Lottos color games puzzle your vision , but they also spotlight what you cant normally see : how your brain works . This fun , first - hand look at your own versatile sense of sight reveals how evolution tints your perception of whats really out there .
I want to start with a game .
And to win this game , all you have to do is see the reality thats in front of you as it really is . All right ?
So , we have two panels here , of colored dots .
And one of those dots is the same in the two panels . Okay ?
And you have to tell me which one .
Now , narrow it down to the gray one , the green one and , say , the orange one .
So , by a show of hands  -  -  well start with the easiest one  -  -  Show of hands : how many people think its the gray one ?
Really ? Okay .
How many people think its the green one ?
And how many people think its the orange one ?
Pretty even split .
Lets find out what the reality is .
Here is the orange one .
Here is the green one .
And here is the gray one .
So , for all of you who saw that , youre a complete realist . All right ?
So , this is pretty amazing , actually , isnt it ?
Because nearly every living system has evolved the ability to detect light in one way or another .
So , for us , seeing color is one of the simplest things the brain does .
And yet , even at this most fundamental level , context is everything .
What I want to talk about is not that context is everything , but why is context everything .
Because its answering that question that tells us not only why we see what we do , but who we are as individuals , and who we are as a society .
But first , we have to ask another question , which is ,  What is color for ? 
And instead of telling you , Ill just show you .
What you see here is a jungle scene , and you see the surfaces according to the amount of light that those surfaces reflect .
Now , can any of you see the predator thats about to jump out at you ?
And if you havent seen it yet , youre dead . Right ?
Can anyone see it ? Anyone ? No ?
Now , lets see the surfaces according to the quality of light that they reflect .
And now you see it .
So , color enables us to see the similarities and differences between surfaces , according to the full spectrum of light that they reflect .
But what youve just done is , in many respects , mathematically impossible .
Why ? Because , as Berkeley tells us , we have no direct access to our physical world , other than through our senses .
And the light that falls onto our eyes is determined by multiple things in the world  -  -  not only the color of objects , but also the color of their illumination , and the color of the space between us and those objects .
You vary any one of those parameters , and youll change the color of the light that falls onto your eye .
This is a huge problem because it means that the same image could have an infinite number of possible real - world sources .
So let me show you what I mean . Imagine that this is the back of your eye .
And these are two projections from the world .
They are identical in every single way .
Identical in shape , size , spectral content .
They are the same , as far as your eye is concerned .
And yet they come from completely different sources .
The one on the right comes from a yellow surface , in shadow , oriented facing the left , viewed through a pinkish medium .
The one on the left comes from an orange surface , under direct light , facing to the right , viewed through a sort of a bluish medium .
Completely different meanings , giving rise to the exact same retinal information .
And yet its only the retinal information that we get .
So how on Earth do we even see ?
So , if you remember anything in this next 18 minutes , remember this : that the light that falls on to your eye , sensory information , is meaningless , because it could mean literally anything .
And whats true for sensory information is true for information generally .
There is no inherent meaning in information .
Its what we do with that information that matters .
So , how do we see ? Well , we see by learning to see .
So , the brain evolved the mechanisms for finding patterns , finding relationships in information and associating those relationships with a behavioral meaning , a significance , by interacting with the world .
Were very aware of this in the form of more cognitive attributes , like language .
So , Im going to give you some letter strings . And I want you to read them out for me , if you can .
Audience :  Can you read this ? 
 You are not reading this . 
 What are you reading ? 
Beau Lotto :  What are you reading ?  Half the letters are missing . Right ?
There is no a priori reason why an  H  has to go between that  W  and  A . 
But you put one there . Why ?
Because in the statistics of your past experience it would have been useful to do so . So you do so again .
And yet you dont put a letter after that first  T . 
Why ? Because it wouldnt have been useful in the past .
So you dont do it again .
So let me show you how quickly our brains can redefine normality , even at the simplest thing the brain does , which is color .
So , if I could have the lights down up here .
I want you to first notice that those two desert scenes are physically the same .
One is simply the flipping of the other . Okay ?
Now I want you to look at that dot between the green and the red . Okay ?
And I want you to stare at that dot . Dont look anywhere else .
And were going to look at that for about 30 seconds , which is a bit of a killer in an 18 - minute talk .
But I really want you to learn .
And Ill tell you  -  -  dont look anywhere else  -  -  and Ill tell you whats happening inside your head .
Your brain is learning . And its learning that the right side of its visual field is under red illumination ; the left side of its visual field is under green illumination .
Thats what its learning . Okay ?
Now , when I tell you , I want you to look at the dot between the two desert scenes .
So why dont you do that now ?
Can I have the lights up again ?
I take it from your response they dont look the same anymore . Right ?
Why ? Because your brain is seeing that same information as if the right one is still under red light , and the left one is still under green light .
Thats your new normal .
So , what does this mean for context ?
It means that I can take these two identical squares , and I can put them in light and dark surrounds .
And now the one on the dark surround looks lighter than the one on the light surround .
Whats significant is not simply the light and dark surrounds that matter .
Its what those light and dark surrounds meant for your behavior in the past .
So Ill show you what I mean . Here we have that exact same illusion .
We have two identical tiles , on the left , one in a dark surround , one in a light surround .
And the same thing over on the right .
Now , what Im going to do is Im going to review those two scenes .
But Im not going to change anything within those boxes , except their meaning .
And see what happens to your perception .
Notice that on the left the two tiles look nearly completely opposite : one very white and one very dark .
All right ? Whereas on the right , the two tiles look nearly the same .
And yet there is still one on a dark surround and one on a light surround .
Why ? Because if the tile in that shadow were in fact in shadow , and reflecting the same amount of light to your eye as the one outside the shadow , it would have to be more reflective  -  -  just the laws of physics .
So you see it that way .
Whereas on the right , the information is consistent with those two tiles being under the same light .
If they are under the same light , reflecting the same amount of light to your eye , then they must be equally reflective .
So you see it that way .
Which means we can bring all this information together to create some incredibly strong illusions .
This is one I made a few years ago .
And youll notice you see a dark brown tile at the top , and a bright orange tile at the side .
That is your perceptual reality . The physical reality is that those two tiles are the same .
Here you see four gray tiles on your left , seven gray tiles on the right .
Im not going to change those tiles at all , but Im going to reveal the rest of the scene and see what happens to your perception .
The four blue tiles on the left are gray .
The seven yellow tiles on the right are also gray .
They are the same . Okay ?
Dont believe me ? Lets watch it again .
Whats true for color is also true for complex perceptions of motion .
So here we have  -  -  lets turn this around  -  -  a diamond .
And what Im going to do is , Im going to hold it here , and Im going to spin it .
And for all of you , youll see it probably spinning this direction .
Now I want you to keep looking at it .
Move your eyes around , blink , maybe close one eye .
And suddenly it will flip , and start spinning the opposite direction .
Yes ? Raise your hand if you got that . Yes ?
Keep blinking . Every time you blink it will switch . Alright ?
So I can ask you , which direction is it rotating ?
How do you know ?
Your brain doesnt know . Because both are equally likely .
So depending on where it looks , it flips between the two possibilities .
Are we the only ones that see illusions ?
The answer to this question is no .
Even the beautiful bumblebee , with its mere one million brain cells , which is 250 times fewer cells than you have in one retina , sees illusions , does the most complicated things that even our most sophisticated computers cant do .
So in my lab , we of course work on bumblebees .
Because we can completely control their experience , and see how that alters the architecture of their brain .
And we do this in what we call the Bee Matrix .
And here you have the hive . You can see the queen bee , that large bee in the middle there . Those are all her daughters , the eggs .
And they go back and forth between this hive and the arena , via this tube .
And youll see one of the bees come out here .
You see how she has a little number on her ?
Yeah there is another one coming out . She has another number on her .
Now , they are not born that way . Right ?
We pull them out , put them in the fridge , and they fall asleep .
And then you can superglue little numbers on them .
And now , in this experiment they get rewarded if they go to the blue flowers .
And they land on the flower . They stick their tongue in there , called a proboscis , and they drink sugar water .
Now she is drinking a glass of water thats about that big to you and I , will do that about three times , and then fly .
And sometimes they learn not to go to the blue , but to go to where the other bees go .
So they copy each other . They can count to five . They can recognize faces .
And here she comes down the ladder .
And shell come into the hive , find an empty honey pot and throw up , and thats honey .
Now remember  -  -   -  -  shes supposed to be going to the blue flowers .
But what are these bees doing in the upper right corner ?
It looks like theyre going to green flowers .
Now , are they getting it wrong ?
And the answer to the question is no . Those are actually blue flowers .
But those are blue flowers under green light .
So they are using the relationships between the colors to solve the puzzle , which is exactly what we do .
So , illusions are often used , especially in art , in the words of a more contemporary artist ,  to demonstrate the fragility of our senses . 
Okay , this is complete rubbish .
The senses arent fragile . And if they were , we wouldnt be here .
Instead , color tells us something completely different , that the brain didnt actually evolve to see the world the way it is .
We cant . Instead , the brain evolved to see the world the way it was useful to see in the past .
And how we see is by continually redefining normality .
So how can we take this incredible capacity of plasticity of the brain and get people to experience their world differently ?
Well , one of the ways we do in my lab and studio is we translate the light into sound and we enable people to hear their visual world .
And they can navigate the world using their ears .
Here is David , in the right . And he is holding a camera .
On the left is what his camera sees .
And youll see there is a line , a faint line going across that image .
That line is broken up into 32 squares .
In each square we calculate the average color .
And then we just simply translate that into sound .
And now hes going to turn around , close his eyes , and find a plate on the ground with his eyes closed .
He finds it . Amazing . Right ?
So not only can we create a prosthetic for the visually impaired , but we can also investigate how people literally make sense of the world .
But we can also do something else . We can also make music with color .
So , working with kids , they created images , thinking about what might the images you see sound like if we could listen to them .
And then we translated these images .
And this is one of those images .
And this is a six - year - old child composing a piece of music for a 32 - piece orchestra .
And this is what it sounds like .
So , a six - year - old child . Okay ?
Now , what does all this mean ?
What this suggests is that no one is an outside observer of nature . Okay ?
We are not defined by our central properties , by the bits that make us up .
Were defined by our environment and our interaction with that environment  -  -  by our ecology .
And that ecology is necessarily relative , historical and empirical .
So what Id like to finish with is this over here .
Because what Ive been trying to do is really celebrate uncertainty .
Because I think only through uncertainty is there potential for understanding .
So , if some of you are still feeling a bit too certain , Id like to do this one .
So , if we have the lights down .
And what we have here  -  -  Can everyone see 25 purple surfaces on your left , and 25 , call it yellowish , surfaces on your right ?
So , now , what I want to do : Im going to put the middle nine surfaces here under yellow illumination by simply putting a filter behind them .
All right . Now you can see that changes the light thats coming through there . Right ?
Because now the light is going through a yellowish filter and then a purplish filter .
Im going to do this opposite on the left here .
Im going to put the middle nine under a purplish light .
Now , some of you will notice that the consequence is that the light coming through those middle nine on the right , or your left , is exactly the same as the light coming through the middle nine on your right .
Agreed ? Yes ?
Okay . So they are physically the same .
Lets pull the covers off .
Now remember , you know the middle nine are exactly the same .
Do they look the same ? No .
The question is ,  Is that an illusion ? 
And Ill leave you with that .
So , thank you very much .
David Pogue : The music wars
New York Times tech columnist David Pogue performs a satirical mini - medley about iTunes and the downloading wars , borrowing a few notes from Sonny and Cher and the Village People .
Ladies and gentlemen , the history of music and television on the Internet in three minutes .
A TED medley  -  -  a TEDley .
Its nine o clock on a Saturday The record stores closed for the night So I fire up the old iTunes music store And soon I am feelin all right I know Steve Jobs can find me a melody With one dollar pricing that rocks I can type in the track and get album names back While still in my PJs and socks Sell us a song , youre the music man My iPods still got 10 gigs to go Yes , we might prefer more compatibility But Steve likes to run the whole show I heard  Desperate Housewives  was great last night But I had a bad piece of cod As I threw up my meal , I thought ,  Its no big deal  Ill watch it tonight on my Pod And now all of the networks are joining in Two bucks a show without ads Its a business those guys always wanted to try But only Steve Jobs had the nads They say were young , dont watch TV They say the Internet is all we see But thats not true ; theyve got it wrong See , all our shows are just two minutes long Hey I got YouTube I got YouTube And now , ladies and gentlemen , a tribute to the Recording Industry Association of America  -  -  the RIAA !
Young man , you were surfin along And then , young man , you downloaded a song And then , dumb man , copied it to your Pod Then a phone call came to tell you ... Youve just been sued by the R - I - A - A Youve just been screwed by the R - I - A - A Their attorneys say you committed a crime And thered better not be a next time Theyve lost their minds at the R - I - A - A Justice is blind at the R - I - A - A Youre depriving the bands You are learning to steal You cant do whatever you feel CD sales have dropped every year Theyre not greedy , theyre just quaking with fear Yes indeedy , what if their end is near And we download all our music Yeah , that would piss off the R - I - A - A No plastic discs from the R - I - A - A What a way to make friends Its a plan that cant fail All your customers off to jail Wholl be next for the R - I - A - A ? What else is vexing the R - I - A - A ? Maybe whistling a tune Maybe humming along Maybe mocking em in a song
Martin Seligman : The new era of positive psychology
Martin Seligman talks about psychology  -  -  as a field of study and as it works one - on - one with each patient and each practitioner . As it moves beyond a focus on disease , what can modern psychology help us to become ?
When I was president of the American Psychological Association , they tried to media - train me , and an encounter I had with CNN summarizes what Im going to be talking about today , which is the eleventh reason to be optimistic .
The editor of Discover told us 10 of them , Im going to give you the eleventh .
So they came to me  -  -  CNN  -  -  and they said ,  Professor Seligman , would you tell us about the state of psychology today ?
Wed like to interview you about that .  And I said ,  Great . 
And she said ,  But this is CNN , so you only get a sound bite . 
So I said ,  Well , how many words do I get ? 
And she said ,  Well , one . 
And cameras rolled , and she said ,  Professor Seligman , what is the state of psychology today ? 
 Good . 
 Cut . Cut . That wont do .
Wed really better give you a longer sound bite . 
 Well , how many words do I get this time ?   I think , well , you get two .
Doctor Seligman , what is the state of psychology today ? 
 Not good . 
 Look , Doctor Seligman , we can see youre really not comfortable in this medium .
Wed better give you a real sound bite .
This time you can have three words .
Professor Seligman , what is the state of psychology today ? 
 Not good enough .  And thats what Im going to be talking about .
I want to say why psychology was good , why it was not good and how it may become , in the next 10 years , good enough .
And by parallel summary , I want to say the same thing about technology , about entertainment and design , because I think the issues are very similar .
So , why was psychology good ?
Well , for more than 60 years , psychology worked within the disease model .
Ten years ago , when I was on an airplane and I introduced myself to my seatmate , and told them what I did , theyd move away from me .
And because , quite rightly , they were saying psychology is about finding whats wrong with you . Spot the loony .
And now , when I tell people what I do , they move toward me .
And what was good about psychology , about the 30 billion dollar investment NIMH made , about working in the disease model , about what you mean by psychology , is that , 60 years ago , none of the disorders were treatable  -  -  it was entirely smoke and mirrors .
And now , 14 of the disorders are treatable , two of them actually curable .
And the other thing that happened is that a science developed , a science of mental illness .
That we found out that we could take fuzzy concepts  -  -  like depression , alcoholism  -  -  and measure them with rigor .
That we could create a classification of the mental illnesses .
That we could understand the causality of the mental illnesses .
We could look across time at the same people  -  -  people , for example , who were genetically vulnerable to schizophrenia  -  -  and ask what the contribution of mothering , of genetics are , and we could isolate third variables by doing experiments on the mental illnesses .
And best of all , we were able , in the last 50 years , to invent drug treatments and psychological treatments .
And then we were able to test them rigorously , in random assignment , placebo controlled designs , throw out the things that didnt work , keep the things that actively did .
And the conclusion of that is that psychology and psychiatry , over the last 60 years , can actually claim that we can make miserable people less miserable .
And I think thats terrific . Im proud of it .
But what was not good , the consequences of that were three things .
The first was moral , that psychologists and psychiatrists became victimologists , pathologizers , that our view of human nature was that if you were in trouble , bricks fell on you .
And we forgot that people made choices and decisions .
We forgot responsibility . That was the first cost .
The second cost was that we forgot about you people .
We forgot about improving normal lives .
We forgot about a mission to make relatively untroubled people happier , more fulfilled , more productive . And  genius ,   high - talent ,  became a dirty word .
No one works on that .
And the third problem about the disease model is , in our rush to do something about people in trouble , in our rush to do something about repairing damage , it never occurred to us to develop interventions to make people happier , positive interventions .
So that was not good .
And so , thats what led people like Nancy Etcoff , Dan Gilbert , Mike Csikszentmihalyi and myself to work in something I call positive psychology , which has three aims .
The first is that psychology should be just as concerned with human strength as it is with weakness .
It should be just as concerned with building strength as with repairing damage .
It should be interested in the best things in life .
And it should be just as concerned with making the lives of normal people fulfilling , and with genius , with nurturing high talent .
So in the last 10 years and the hope for the future , weve seen the beginnings of a science of positive psychology , a science of what makes life worth living .
It turns out that we can measure different forms of happiness .
And any of you , for free , can go to that website and take the entire panoply of tests of happiness .
You can ask , how do you stack up for positive emotion , for meaning , for flow , against literally tens of thousands of other people ?
We created the opposite of the diagnostic manual of the insanities : a classification of the strengths and virtues that looks at the sex ratio , how theyre defined , how to diagnose them , what builds them and what gets in their way .
We found that we could discover the causation of the positive states , the relationship between left hemispheric activity and right hemispheric activity as a cause of happiness .
Ive spent my life working on extremely miserable people , and Ive asked the question , how do extremely miserable people differ from the rest of you ?
And starting about six years ago , we asked about extremely happy people .
And how do they differ from the rest of us ?
And it turns out theres one way .
Theyre not more religious , theyre not in better shape , they dont have more money , theyre not better looking , they dont have more good events and fewer bad events .
The one way in which they differ : theyre extremely social .
They dont sit in seminars on Saturday morning .
They dont spend time alone .
Each of them is in a romantic relationship and each has a rich repertoire of friends .
But watch out here . This is merely correlational data , not causal , and its about happiness in the first Hollywood sense Im going to talk about : happiness of ebullience and giggling and good cheer .
And Im going to suggest to you thats not nearly enough , in just a moment .
We found we could begin to look at interventions over the centuries , from the Buddha to Tony Robbins .
About 120 interventions have been proposed that allegedly make people happy .
And we find that weve been able to manualize many of them , and we actually carry out random assignment efficacy and effectiveness studies .
That is , which ones actually make people lastingly happier ?
In a couple of minutes , Ill tell you about some of those results .
But the upshot of this is that the mission I want psychology to have , in addition to its mission of curing the mentally ill , and in addition to its mission of making miserable people less miserable , is can psychology actually make people happier ?
And to ask that question  -  -  happy is not a word I use very much  -  -  weve had to break it down into what I think is askable about happy .
And I believe there are three different  -  -  and I call them different because different interventions build them , its possible to have one rather than the other  -  -  three different happy lives .
The first happy life is the pleasant life .
This is a life in which you have as much positive emotion as you possibly can , and the skills to amplify it .
The second is a life of engagement  -  -  a life in your work , your parenting , your love , your leisure , time stops for you .
Thats what Aristotle was talking about .
And third , the meaningful life .
So I want to say a little bit about each of those lives and what we know about them .
The first life is the pleasant life and its simply , as best we can find it , its having as many of the pleasures as you can , as much positive emotion as you can , and learning the skills  -  -  savoring , mindfulness  -  -  that amplify them , that stretch them over time and space .
But the pleasant life has three drawbacks , and its why positive psychology is not happy - ology and why it doesnt end here .
The first drawback is that it turns out the pleasant life , your experience of positive emotion , is heritable , about 50 percent heritable , and , in fact , not very modifiable .
So the different tricks that Matthieu  Ricard  and I and others know about increasing the amount of positive emotion in your life are 15 to 20 percent tricks , getting more of it .
Second is that positive emotion habituates . It habituates rapidly , indeed .
Its all like French vanilla ice cream , the first taste is a 100 percent ; by the time youre down to the sixth taste , its gone .
And , as I said , its not particularly malleable .
And this leads to the second life .
And I have to tell you about my friend , Len , to talk about why positive psychology is more than positive emotion , more than building pleasure .
In two of the three great arenas of life , by the time Len was 30 , Len was enormously successful . The first arena was work .
By the time he was 20 , he was an options trader .
By the time he was 25 , he was a multimillionaire and the head of an options trading company .
Second , in play  -  -  hes a national champion bridge player .
But in the third great arena of life , love , Len is an abysmal failure .
And the reason he was , was that Len is a cold fish .
Len is an introvert .
American women said to Len , when he dated them ,  Youre no fun . You dont have positive emotion . Get lost . 
And Len was wealthy enough to be able to afford a Park Avenue psychoanalyst , who for five years tried to find the sexual trauma that had somehow locked positive emotion inside of him .
But it turned out there wasnt any sexual trauma .
It turned out that  -  -  Len grew up in Long Island and he played football and watched football , and played bridge  -  -  Len is in the bottom five percent of what we call positive affectivities .
The question is , is Len unhappy ? And I want to say not .
Contrary to what psychology told us about the bottom 50 percent of the human race in positive affectivity , I think Len is one of the happiest people I know .
Hes not consigned to the hell of unhappiness and thats because Len , like most of you , is enormously capable of flow .
When he walks onto the floor of the American Exchange at 9 : 30 in the morning , time stops for him . And it stops till the closing bell .
When the first card is played , until 10 days later , the tournament is over , time stops for Len .
And this is indeed what Mike Csikszentmihalyi has been talking about , about flow . And its distinct from pleasure in a very important way .
Pleasure has raw feels : you know its happening . Its thought and feeling .
But what Mike told you yesterday  -  -  during flow , you cant feel anything .
Youre one with the music . Time stops .
You have intense concentration .
And this is indeed the characteristic of what we think of as the good life .
And we think theres a recipe for it , and its knowing what your highest strengths are .
And again , theres a valid test of what your five highest strengths are .
And then re - crafting your life to use them as much as you possibly can .
Re - crafting your work , your love , your play , your friendship , your parenting .
Just one example . One person I worked with was a bagger at Genuardis .
Hated the job .
Shes working her way through college .
Her highest strength was social intelligence , so she re - crafted bagging to make the encounter with her the social highlight of every customers day .
Now obviously she failed .
But what she did was to take her highest strengths , and re - craft work to use them as much as possible .
What you get out of that is not smiley - ness .
You dont look like Debbie Reynolds .
You dont giggle a lot . What you get is more absorption .
So , thats the second path . The first path , positive emotion .
The second path is eudaimonian flow .
And the third path is meaning .
This is the most venerable of the happinesses , traditionally .
And meaning , in this view , consists of  -  -  very parallel to eudaimonia  -  -  it consists of knowing what your highest strengths are , and using them to belong to and in the service of something larger than you are .
I mentioned that for all three kinds of lives , the pleasant life , the good life , the meaningful life , people are now hard at work on the question , are there things that lastingly change those lives ?
And the answer seems to be yes . And Ill just give you some samples of it .
Its being done in a rigorous manner .
Its being done in the same way that we test drugs to see what really works .
So we do random assignment , placebo controlled , long - term studies of different interventions .
And just to sample the kind of interventions that we find have an effect , when we teach people about the pleasant life , how to have more pleasure in your life , one of your assignments is to take the mindfulness skills , the savoring skills , and youre assigned to design a beautiful day .
Next Saturday , set a day aside , design yourself a beautiful day , and use savoring and mindfulness to enhance those pleasures .
And we can show in that way that the pleasant life is enhanced .
Gratitude visit . I want you all to do this with me now , if you would .
Close your eyes .
Id like you to remember someone who did something enormously important that changed your life in a good direction , and who you never properly thanked .
The person has to be alive . OK .
Now , OK , you can open your eyes .
I hope all of you have such a person .
Your assignment , when youre learning the gratitude visit , is to write a 300 - word testimonial to that person , call them on the phone in Phoenix , ask if you can visit , dont tell them why , show up at their door , you read the testimonial  -  -  everyone weeps when this happens .
And what happens is when we test people one week later , a month later , three months later , theyre both happier and less depressed .
Another example is a strength date , in which we get couples to identify their highest strengths on the strengths test , and then to design an evening in which they both use their strengths , and we find this is a strengthener of relationships .
And fun versus philanthropy .
But its so heartening to be in a group like this , in which so many of you have turned your lives to philanthropy .
Well , my undergraduates and the people I work with havent discovered this , so we actually have people do something altruistic and do something fun , and to contrast it .
And what you find is when you do something fun , it has a square wave walk set .
When you do something philanthropic to help another person , it lasts and it lasts .
So those are examples of positive interventions .
So , the next to last thing I want to say is were interested in how much life satisfaction people have .
And this is really what youre about . And thats our target variable .
And we ask the question as a function of the three different lives , how much life satisfaction do you get ?
So we ask  -  -  and weve done this in 15 replications involving thousands of people  -  -  to what extent does the pursuit of pleasure , the pursuit of positive emotion , the pleasant life , the pursuit of engagement , time stopping for you , and the pursuit of meaning contribute to life satisfaction ?
And our results surprised us , but they were backward of what we thought .
It turns out the pursuit of pleasure has almost no contribution to life satisfaction .
The pursuit of meaning is the strongest .
The pursuit of engagement is also very strong .
Where pleasure matters is if you have both engagement and you have meaning , then pleasures the whipped cream and the cherry .
Which is to say , the full life  -  -  the sum is greater than the parts , if youve got all three .
Conversely , if you have none of the three , the empty life , the sum is less than the parts .
And what were asking now is does the very same relationship , physical health , morbidity , how long you live and productivity , follow the same relationship ?
That is , in a corporation , is productivity a function of positive emotion , engagement and meaning ?
Is health a function of positive engagement , of pleasure , and of meaning in life ?
And there is reason to think the answer to both of those may well be yes .
So , Chris said that the last speaker had a chance to try to integrate what he heard , and so this was amazing for me . Ive never been in a gathering like this .
Ive never seen speakers stretch beyond themselves so much , which was one of the remarkable things .
But I found that the problems of psychology seemed to be parallel to the problems of technology , entertainment and design in the following way .
We all know that technology , entertainment and design have been and can be used for destructive purposes .
We also know that technology , entertainment and design can be used to relieve misery .
And by the way , the distinction between relieving misery and building happiness is extremely important .
I thought , when I first became a therapist 30 years ago , that if I was good enough to make someone not depressed , not anxious , not angry , that Id make them happy .
And I never found that . I found the best you could ever do was to get to zero .
But they were empty .
And it turns out the skills of happiness , the skills of the pleasant life , the skills of engagement , the skills of meaning , are different from the skills of relieving misery .
And so , the parallel thing holds with technology , entertainment and design , I believe .
That is , it is possible for these three drivers of our world to increase happiness , to increase positive emotion , and thats typically how theyve been used .
But once you fractionate happiness the way I do  -  -  not just positive emotion , thats not nearly enough  -  -  theres flow in life , and theres meaning in life .
As Laura Lee told us , design , and , I believe , entertainment and technology , can be used to increase meaning engagement in life as well .
So in conclusion , the eleventh reason for optimism , in addition to the space elevator , is that I think with technology , entertainment and design , we can actually increase the amount of tonnage of human happiness on the planet .
And if technology can , in the next decade or two , increase the pleasant life , the good life and the meaningful life , it will be good enough .
If entertainment can be diverted to also increase positive emotion , meaning , eudaimonia , it will be good enough .
And if design can increase positive emotion , eudaimonia , and flow and meaning , what were all doing together will become good enough . Thank you .
AnnMarie Thomas : Hands - on science with squishy circuits
In a zippy demo at TED U , AnnMarie Thomas shows how two different kinds of homemade play dough can be used to demonstrate electrical properties  -  -  by lighting up LEDs , spinning motors , and turning little kids into circuit designers .
Im a huge believer in hands - on education .
But you have to have the right tools .
If Im going to teach my daughter about electronics , Im not going to give her a soldering iron .
And similarly , she finds prototyping boards really frustrating for her little hands .
So my wonderful student Sam and I decided to look at the most tangible thing we could think of : Play - Doh .
And so we spent a summer looking at different Play - Doh recipes .
And these recipes probably look really familiar to any of you who have made homemade play - dough  -  -  pretty standard ingredients you probably have in your kitchen .
We have two favorite recipes  -  -  one that has these ingredients and a second that had sugar instead of salt .
And theyre great . We can make great little sculptures with these .
But the really cool thing about them is when we put them together .
You see that really salty Play - Doh ?
Well , it conducts electricity .
And this is nothing new .
It turns out that regular Play - Doh that you buy at the store conducts electricity , and high school physics teachers have used that for years .
But our homemade play - dough actually has half the resistance of commercial Play - Doh .
And that sugar dough ?
Well its 150 times more resistant to electric current than that salt dough .
So what does that mean ?
Well it means if you them together you suddenly have circuits  -  -  circuits that the most creative , tiny , little hands can build on their own .
And so I want to do a little demo for you .
So if I take this salt dough , again , its like the play - dough you probably made as kids , and I plug it in  -  -  its a two - lead battery pack , simple battery pack , you can buy them at Radio Shack and pretty much anywhere else  -  -  we can actually then light things up .
But if any of you have studied electrical engineering , we can also create a short circuit .
If I push these together , the light turns off .
Right , the current wants to run through the play - dough , not through that LED .
If I separate them again , I have some light .
Well now if I take that sugar dough , the sugar dough doesnt want to conduct electricity .
Its like a wall to the electricity .
If I place that between , now all the dough is touching , but if I stick that light back in , I have light .
In fact , I could even add some movement to my sculptures .
If I want a spinning tail , lets grab a motor , put some play - dough on it , stick it on and we have spinning .
And once you have the basics , we can make a slightly more complicated circuit .
We call this our sushi circuit . Its very popular with kids .
I plug in again the power to it .
And now I can start talking about parallel and series circuits .
I can start plugging in lots of lights .
And we can start talking about things like electrical load .
What happens if I put in lots of lights and then add a motor ?
Itll dim .
We can even add microprocessors and have this as an input and create squishy sound music that weve done .
You could do parallel and series circuits for kids using this .
So this is all in your home kitchen .
Weve actually tried to turn it into an electrical engineering lab .
We have a website , its all there . These are the home recipes .
Weve got some videos . You can make them yourselves .
And its been really fun since we put them up to see where these have gone .
Weve had a mom in Utah who used them with her kids , to a science researcher in the U.K . , and curriculum developers in Hawaii .
So I would encourage you all to grab some Play - Doh , grab some salt , grab some sugar and start playing .
We dont usually think of our kitchen as an electrical engineering lab or little kids as circuit designers , but maybe we should .
Have fun . Thank you .
Billy Graham : On technology and faith
Speaking at TED in 1998 , Rev. Billy Graham marvels at technologys power to improve lives and change the world  -  -  but says the end of evil , suffering and death will come only after the world accepts Christ . A legendary talk from TEDs archives .
As a clergyman , you can imagine how out of place I feel .
I feel like a fish out of water , or maybe an owl out of the air .
I was preaching in San Jose some time ago , and my friend Mark Kvamme , who helped introduce me to this conference , brought several CEOs and leaders of some of the companies here in the Silicon Valley to have breakfast with me , or I with them .
And I was so stimulated .
And had such  -  -  it was an eye - opening experience to hear them talk about the world that is yet to come through technology and science .
I know that were near the end of this conference , and some of you may be wondering why they have a speaker from the field of religion .
Richard can answer that , because he made that decision .
But some years ago I was on an elevator in Philadelphia , coming down .
I was to address a conference at a hotel .
And on that elevator a man said ,  I hear Billy Graham is staying in this hotel . 
And another man looked in my direction and said ,  Yes , there he is . Hes on this elevator with us . 
And this man looked me up and down for about 10 seconds , and he said ,  My , what an anticlimax ! 
I hope that you wont feel that these few moments with me is not a  -  -  is an anticlimax , after all these tremendous talks that youve heard , and addresses , which I intend to listen to every one of them .
But I was on an airplane in the east some years ago , and the man sitting across the aisle from me was the mayor of Charlotte , North Carolina .
His name was John Belk . Some of you will probably know him .
And there was a drunk man on there , and he got up out of his seat two or three times , and he was making everybody upset by what he was trying to do .
And he was slapping the stewardess and pinching her as she went by , and everybody was upset with him .
And finally , John Belk said ,  Do you know whos sitting here ? 
And the man said ,  No , who ? 
He said ,  Its Billy Graham , the preacher . 
He said ,  You dont say ! 
And he turned to me , and he said ,  Put her there ! 
He said ,  Your sermons have certainly helped me . 
And I suppose that thats true with thousands of people .
I know that as you have been peering into the future , and as weve heard some of it here tonight , I would like to live in that age and see what is going to be .
But I wont , because Im 80 years old . This is my eightieth year , and I know that my time is brief .
I have phlebitis at the moment , in both legs , and thats the reason that I had to have a little help in getting up here , because I have Parkinsons disease in addition to that , and some other problems that I wont talk about .
But this is not the first time that weve had a technological revolution .
Weve had others .
And theres one that I want to talk about .
In one generation , the nation of the people of Israel had a tremendous and dramatic change that made them a great power in the Near East .
A man by the name of David came to the throne , and King David became one of the great leaders of his generation .
He was a man of tremendous leadership .
He had the favor of God with him .
He was a brilliant poet , philosopher , writer , soldier  -  -  with strategies in battle and conflict that people study even today .
But about two centuries before David , the Hittites had discovered the secret of smelting and processing of iron , and , slowly , that skill spread .
But they wouldnt allow the Israelis to look into it , or to have any .
But David changed all of that , and he introduced the Iron Age to Israel .
And the Bible says that David laid up great stores of iron , and which archaeologists have found , that in present - day Palestine , there are evidences of that generation .
Now , instead of crude tools made of sticks and stones , Israel now had iron plows , and sickles , and hoes and military weapons .
And in the course of one generation , Israel was completely changed .
The introduction of iron , in some ways , had an impact a little bit like the microchip has had on our generation .
And David found that there were many problems that technology could not solve .
There were many problems still left .
And theyre still with us , and you havent solved them , and I havent heard anybody here speak to that .
How do we solve these three problems that Id like to mention ?
The first one that David saw was human evil .
Where does it come from ?
How do we solve it ?
Over again and again in the Psalms , which Gladstone said was the greatest book in the world , David describes the evils of the human race .
And yet he says ,  He restores my soul . 
Have you ever thought about what a contradiction we are ?
On one hand , we can probe the deepest secrets of the universe and dramatically push back the frontiers of technology , as this conference vividly demonstrates .
Weve seen under the sea , three miles down , or galaxies hundreds of billions of years out in the future .
But on the other hand , something is wrong .
Our battleships , our soldiers , are on a frontier now , almost ready to go to war with Iraq .
Now , what causes this ?
Why do we have these wars in every generation , and in every part of the world ?
And revolutions ?
We cant get along with other people , even in our own families .
We find ourselves in the paralyzing grip of self - destructive habits we cant break .
Racism and injustice and violence sweep our world , bringing a tragic harvest of heartache and death .
Even the most sophisticated among us seem powerless to break this cycle .
I would like to see Oracle take up that , or some other technological geniuses work on this .
How do we change man , so that he doesnt lie and cheat , and our newspapers are not filled with stories of fraud in business or labor or athletics or wherever ?
The Bible says the problem is within us , within our hearts and our souls .
Our problem is that we are separated from our Creator , which we call God , and we need to have our souls restored , something only God can do .
Jesus said ,  For out of the heart come evil thoughts : murders , sexual immorality , theft , false testimonies , slander . 
The British philosopher Bertrand Russell was not a religious man , but he said ,  Its in our hearts that the evil lies , and its from our hearts that it must be plucked out . 
Albert Einstein  -  -  I was just talking to someone , when I was speaking at Princeton , and I met Mr. Einstein .
He didnt have a doctors degree , because he said nobody was qualified to give him one .
But he made this statement .
He said ,  Its easier to denature plutonium than to denature the evil spirit of man . 
And many of you , Im sure , have thought about that and puzzled over it .
Youve seen people take beneficial technological advances , such as the Internet weve heard about tonight , and twist them into something corrupting .
Youve seen brilliant people devise computer viruses that bring down whole systems .
The Oklahoma City bombing was simple technology , horribly used .
The problem is not technology .
The problem is the person or persons using it .
King David said that he knew the depths of his own soul .
He couldnt free himself from personal problems and personal evils that included murder and adultery .
Yet King David sought Gods forgiveness , and said ,  You can restore my soul . 
You see , the Bible teaches that were more than a body and a mind .
We are a soul .
And theres something inside of us that is beyond our understanding .
Thats the part of us that yearns for God , or something more than we find in technology .
Your soul is that part of you that yearns for meaning in life , and which seeks for something beyond this life .
Its the part of you that yearns , really , for God .
I find  that  young people all over the world are searching for something .
They dont know what it is . I speak at many universities , and I have many questions and answer periods , and whether its Cambridge , or Harvard , or Oxford  -  -  Ive spoken at all of those universities .
Im going to Harvard in about three or four  -  -  no , its about two months from now  -  -  to give a lecture .
And Ill be asked the same questions that I was asked the last few times Ive been there .
And itll be on these questions : where did I come from ? Why am I here ? Where am I going ?
Whats life all about ? Why am I here ?
Even if you have no religious belief , there are times when you wonder that theres something else .
Thomas Edison also said ,  When you see everything that happens in the world of science , and in the working of the universe , you can not deny that theres a captain on the bridge . 
I remember once , I sat beside Mrs. Gorbachev at a White House dinner .
I went to Ambassador Dobrynin , whom I knew very well .
And Id been to Russia several times under the Communists , and theyd given me marvelous freedom that I didnt expect .
And I knew Mr. Dobrynin very well , and I said ,  Im going to sit beside Mrs. Gorbachev tonight .
What shall I talk to her about ? 
And he surprised me with the answer .
He said ,  Talk to her about religion and philosophy .
Thats what shes really interested in . 
I was a little bit surprised , but that evening thats what we talked about , and it was a stimulating conversation .
And afterward , she said ,  You know , Im an atheist , but I know that theres something up there higher than we are . 
The second problem that King David realized he could not solve was the problem of human suffering .
Writing the oldest book in the world was Job , and he said ,  Man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward . 
Yes , to be sure , science has done much to push back certain types of human suffering .
But Im  -  -  in a few months , Ill be 80 years of age .
I admit that Im very grateful for all the medical advances that have kept me in relatively good health all these years .
My doctors at the Mayo Clinic urged me not to take this trip out here to this  -  -  to be here .
I havent given a talk in nearly four months .
And when you speak as much as I do , three or four times a day , you get rusty .
Thats the reason Im using this podium and using these notes .
Every time you ever hear me on the television or somewhere , Im ad - libbing .
Im not reading . I never read an address .
I never read a speech or a talk or a lecture .
I talk ad lib .
But tonight , Ive got some notes here so that if I begin to forget , which I do sometimes , Ive got something I can turn to .
But even here among us , most  -  -  in the most advanced society in the world , we have poverty .
We have families that self - destruct , friends that betray us .
Unbearable psychological pressures bear down on us .
Ive never met a person in the world that didnt have a problem or a worry .
Why do we suffer ? Its an age - old question that we havent answered .
Yet David again and again said that he would turn to God .
He said ,  The Lord is my shepherd . 
The final problem that David knew he could not solve was death .
Many commentators have said that death is the forbidden subject of our generation .
Most people live as if theyre never going to die .
Technology projects the myth of control over our mortality .
We see people on our screens .
Marilyn Monroe is just as beautiful on the screen as she was in person , and our  -  -  many young people think shes still alive .
They dont know that shes dead .
Or Clark Gable , or whoever it is .
The old stars , they come to life .
And theyre  -  -  theyre just as great on that screen as they were in person .
But death is inevitable .
I spoke some time ago to a joint session of Congress , last year .
And we were meeting in that room , the statue room .
About 300 of them were there .
And I said ,  Theres one thing that we have in common in this room , all of us together , whether Republican or Democrat , or whoever . 
I said ,  Were all going to die .
And we have that in common with all these great men of the past that are staring down at us . 
And its often difficult for young people to understand that .
Its difficult for them to understand that theyre going to die .
As the ancient writer of Ecclesiastes wrote , he said , theres every activity under heaven .
Theres a time to be born , and theres a time to die .
Ive stood at the deathbed of several famous people , whom you would know .
Ive talked to them .
Ive seen them in those agonizing moments when they were scared to death .
And yet , a few years earlier , death never crossed their mind .
I talked to a woman this past week whose father was a famous doctor .
She said he never thought of God , never talked about God , didnt believe in God . He was an atheist .
But she said , as he came to die , he sat up on the side of the bed one day , and he asked the nurse if he could see the chaplain .
And he said , for the first time in his life hed thought about the inevitable , and about God .
Was there a God ?
A few years ago , a university student asked me ,  What is the greatest surprise in your life ? 
And I said ,  The greatest surprise in my life is the brevity of life .
It passes so fast . 
But it does not need to have to be that way .
Wernher von Braun , in the aftermath of World War II concluded , quote :  science and religion are not antagonists .
On the contrary , theyre sisters . 
He put it on a personal basis .
I knew Dr . von Braun very well .
And he said ,  Speaking for myself , I can only say that the grandeur of the cosmos serves only to confirm a belief in the certainty of a creator . 
He also said ,  In our search to know God , Ive come to believe that the life of Jesus Christ should be the focus of our efforts and inspiration .
The reality of this life and His resurrection is the hope of mankind . 
Ive done a lot of speaking in Germany and in France , and in different parts of the world  -  -  105 countries its been my privilege to speak in .
And I was invited one day to visit Chancellor Adenauer , who was looked upon as sort of the founder of modern Germany , since the war .
And he once  -  -  and he said to me , he said ,  Young man .  He said ,  Do you believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ ? 
And I said ,  Sir , I do . 
He said ,  So do I . 
He said ,  When I leave office , Im going to spend my time writing a book on why Jesus Christ rose again , and why its so important to believe that . 
In one of his plays , Alexander Solzhenitsyn depicts a man dying , who says to those gathered around his bed ,  The moment when its terrible to feel regret is when one is dying . 
How should one live in order not to feel regret when one is dying ?
Blaise Pascal asked exactly that question in seventeenth - century France .
Pascal has been called the architect of modern civilization .
He was a brilliant scientist at the frontiers of mathematics , even as a teenager .
He is viewed by many as the founder of the probability theory , and a creator of the first model of a computer .
And of course , you are all familiar with the computer language named for him .
Pascal explored in depth our human dilemmas of evil , suffering and death .
He was astounded at the phenomenon weve been considering : that people can achieve extraordinary heights in science , the arts and human enterprise , yet they also are full of anger , hypocrisy and have  -  -  and self - hatreds .
Pascal saw us as a remarkable mixture of genius and self - delusion .
On November 23 , 1654 , Pascal had a profound religious experience .
He wrote in his journal these words :  I submit myself , absolutely , to Jesus Christ , my redeemer . 
A French historian said , two centuries later ,  Seldom has so mighty an intellect submitted with such humility to the authority of Jesus Christ . 
Pascal came to believe not only the love and the grace of God could bring us back into harmony , but he believed that his own sins and failures could be forgiven , and that when he died he would go to a place called heaven .
He experienced it in a way that went beyond scientific observation and reason .
It was he who penned the well - known words ,  The heart has its reasons , which reason knows not of . 
Equally well known is Pascals Wager .
Essentially , he said this :  if you bet on God , and open yourself to his love , you lose nothing , even if youre wrong .
But if instead you bet that there is no God , then you can lose it all , in this life and the life to come . 
For Pascal , scientific knowledge paled beside the knowledge of God .
The knowledge of God was far beyond anything that ever crossed his mind .
He was ready to face him when he died at the age of 39 .
King David lived to be 70 , a long time in his era .
Yet he too had to face death , and he wrote these words :  even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death , I will fear no evil , for you are with me . 
This was Davids answer to three dilemmas of evil , suffering and death .
It can be yours , as well , as you seek the living God and allow him to fill your life and give you hope for the future .
When I was 17 years of age , I was born and reared on a farm in North Carolina .
I milked cows every morning , and I had to milk the same cows every evening when I came home from school .
And there were 20 of them that I had  -  -  that I was responsible for , and I worked on the farm and tried to keep up with my studies .
I didnt make good grades in high school .
I didnt make them in college , until something happened in my heart .
One day , I was faced face - to - face with Christ .
He said ,  I am the way , the truth and the life . 
Can you imagine that ?  I am the truth .
Im the embodiment of all truth . 
He was a liar .
Or he was insane .
Or he was what he claimed to be .
Which was he ?
I had to make that decision .
I couldnt prove it .
I couldnt take it to a laboratory and experiment with it .
But by faith I said , I believe him , and he came into my heart and changed my life .
And now Im ready , when I hear that call , to go into the presence of God .
Thank you , and God bless all of you .
Thank you for the privilege . It was great .
Richard Wurman : You did it .
Thanks .
Patricia Ryan : Dont insist on English !
In her talk , longtime English teacher Patricia Ryan asks a provocative question : Is the worlds focus on English preventing the spread of great ideas in other languages ? Its a passionate defense of translating and sharing ideas . 
I know what youre thinking .
You think Ive lost my way , and somebodys going to come on the stage in a minute and guide me gently back to my seat .
I get that all the time in Dubai .
 Here on holiday are you , dear ? 
 Come to visit the children ?
How long are you staying ? 
Well actually , I hope for a while longer yet .
I have been living and teaching in the Gulf for over 30 years .
And in that time , I have seen a lot of changes .
Now that statistic is quite shocking .
And I want to talk to you today about language loss and the globalization of English .
I want to tell you about my friend who was teaching English to adults in Abu Dhabi .
And one fine day , she decided to take them into the garden to teach them some nature vocabulary .
But it was she who ended up learning all the Arabic words for the local plants , as well as their uses  -  -  medicinal uses , cosmetics , cooking , herbal .
How did those students get all that knowledge ?
Of course , from their grandparents and even their great - grandparents .
Its not necessary to tell you how important it is to be able to communicate across generations .
But sadly , today , languages are dying at an unprecedented rate .
A language dies every 14 days .
Now , at the same time , English is the undisputed global language .
Could there be a connection ?
Well I dont know .
But I do know that Ive seen a lot of changes .
When I first came out to the Gulf , I came to Kuwait in the days when it was still a hardship post .
Actually , not that long ago .
That is a little bit too early .
But nevertheless , I was recruited by the British Council , along with about 25 other teachers .
And we were the first non - Muslims to teach in the state schools there in Kuwait .
We were brought to teach English because the government wanted to modernize the country and to empower the citizens through education .
And of course , the U.K . benefited from some of that lovely oil wealth .
Okay .
Now this is the major change that Ive seen  -  -  how teaching English has morphed from being a mutually beneficial practice to becoming a massive international business that it is today .
No longer just a foreign language on the school curriculum , and no longer the sole domain of mother England , it has become a bandwagon for every English - speaking nation on earth .
And why not ?
After all , the best education  -  -  according to the latest World University Rankings  -  -  is to be found in the universities of the U.K . and the U.S .
So everybody wants to have an English education , naturally .
But if youre not a native speaker , you have to pass a test .
Now can it be right to reject a student on linguistic ability alone ?
Perhaps you have a computer scientist whos a genius .
Would he need the same language as a lawyer , for example ?
Well , I dont think so .
We English teachers reject them all the time .
We put a stop sign , and we stop them in their tracks .
They cant pursue their dream any longer , til they get English .
Now let me put it this way : if I met a monolingual Dutch speaker who had the cure for cancer , would I stop him from entering my British University ?
I dont think so .
But indeed , that is exactly what we do .
We English teachers are the gatekeepers .
And you have to satisfy us first that your English is good enough .
Now it can be dangerous to give too much power to a narrow segment of society .
Maybe the barrier would be too universal .
Okay .
 But ,  I hear you say ,  what about the research ?
Its all in English . 
So the books are in English , the journals are done in English , but that is a self - fulfilling prophecy .
It feeds the English requirement .
And so it goes on .
I ask you , what happened to translation ?
If you think about the Islamic Golden Age , there was lots of translation then .
They translated from Latin and Greek into Arabic , into Persian , and then it was translated on into the Germanic languages of Europe and the Romance languages .
And so light shone upon the Dark Ages of Europe .
Now dont get me wrong ; I am not against teaching English , all you English teachers out there .
I love it that we have a global language .
We need one today more than ever .
But I am against using it as a barrier .
Do we really want to end up with 600 languages and the main one being English , or Chinese ?
We need more than that . Where do we draw the line ?
This system equates intelligence with a knowledge of English , which is quite arbitrary .
And I want to remind you that the giants upon whose shoulders todays intelligentsia stand did not have to have English , they didnt have to pass an English test .
Case in point , Einstein .
He , by the way , was considered remedial at school because he was , in fact , dyslexic .
But fortunately for the world , he did not have to pass an English test .
Because they didnt start until 1964 with TOEFL , the American test of English .
Now its exploded .
There are lots and lots of tests of English .
And millions and millions of students take these tests every year .
Now you might think , you and me ,  Those fees arent bad , theyre okay ,  but they are prohibitive to so many millions of poor people .
So immediately , were rejecting them .
It brings to mind a headline I saw recently :  Education : The Great Divide . 
Now I get it , I understand why people would want to focus on English .
They want to give their children the best chance in life .
And to do that , they need a Western education .
Because , of course , the best jobs go to people out of the Western Universities , that I put on earlier .
Its a circular thing .
Okay .
Let me tell you a story about two scientists , two English scientists .
They were doing an experiment to do with genetics and the forelimbs and the hind limbs of animals .
But they couldnt get the results they wanted .
They really didnt know what to do , until along came a German scientist who realized that they were using two words for forelimb and hind limb , whereas genetics does not differentiate and neither does German .
So bingo , problem solved .
If you cant think a thought , you are stuck .
But if another language can think that thought , then , by cooperating , we can achieve and learn so much more .
My daughter came to England from Kuwait .
She had studied science and mathematics in Arabic .
Its an Arabic medium school .
She had to translate it into English at her grammar school .
And she was the best in the class at those subjects .
Which tells us that when students come to us from abroad , we may not be giving them enough credit for what they know , and they know it in their own language .
When a language dies , we dont know what we lose with that language .
This is  -  -  I dont know if you saw it on CNN recently  -  -  they gave the Heroes Award to a young Kenyan shepherd boy who couldnt study at night in his village , like all the village children , because the kerosene lamp , it had smoke and it damaged his eyes .
And anyway , there was never enough kerosene , because what does a dollar a day buy for you ?
So he invented a cost - free solar lamp .
And now the children in his village get the same grades at school as the children who have electricity at home .
When he received his award , he said these lovely words :  The children can lead Africa from what it is today , a dark continent , to a light continent . 
A simple idea , but it could have such far - reaching consequences .
People who have no light , whether its physical or metaphorical , can not pass our exams , and we can never know what they know .
Let us not keep them and ourselves in the dark .
Let us celebrate diversity .
Mind your language .
Use it to spread great ideas .
Thank you very much .
Alex Steffen : The shareable future of cities
How can cities help save the future ? Alex Steffen shows some cool neighborhood - based green projects that expand our access to things we want and need  -  -  while reducing the time we spend in cars .
Climate change is already a heavy topic , and its getting heavier because were understanding that we need to do more than we are .
Were understanding , in fact , that those of us who live in the developed world need to be really pushing towards eliminating our emissions .
Thats , to put it mildly , not whats on the table now .
And it tends to feel a little overwhelming when we look at what is there in reality today and the magnitude of the problem that we face .
And when we have overwhelming problems in front of us , we tend to seek simple answers .
And I think this is what weve done with climate change .
We look at where the emissions are coming from  -  -  theyre coming out of our tailpipes and smokestacks and so forth , and we say , okay , well the problem is that theyre coming out of fossil fuels that were burning , so therefore , the answer must be to replace those fossil fuels with clean sources of energy .
And while , of course , we do need clean energy , I would put to you that its possible that by looking at climate change as a clean energy generation problem , were in fact setting ourselves up not to solve it .
And the reason why is that we live on a planet that is rapidly urbanizing .
That shouldnt be news to any of us .
However , its hard sometimes to remember the extent of that urbanization .
By mid - century , were going to have about eight billion  -  -  perhaps more  -  -  people living in cities or within a days travel of one .
We will be an overwhelmingly urban species .
In order to provide the kind of energy that it would take for eight billion people living in cities that are even somewhat like the cities that those of us in the global North live in today , we would have to generate an absolutely astonishing amount of energy .
It may be possible that we are not even able to build that much clean energy .
So if were seriously talking about tackling climate change on an urbanizing planet , we need to look somewhere else for the solution .
The solution , in fact , may be closer to hand than we think , because all of those cities were building are opportunities .
Every city determines to a very large extent the amount of energy used by its inhabitants .
We tend to think of energy use as a behavioral thing  -  -  I choose to turn this light switch on  -  -  but really , enormous amounts of our energy use are predestined by the kinds of communities and cities that we live in .
I wont show you very many graphs today , but if I can just focus on this one for a moment , it really tells us a lot of what we need to know  -  -  which is , quite simply , that if you look , for example , at transportation , a major category of climate emissions , there is a direct relationship between how dense a city is and the amount of climate emissions that its residents spew out into the air .
And the correlation , of course , is that denser places tend to have lower emissions  -  -  which isnt really all that difficult to figure out , if you think about it .
Basically , we substitute , in our lives , access to the things we want .
We go out there and we hop in our cars and we drive from place to place .
And were basically using mobility to get the access we need .
But when we live in a denser community , suddenly what we find , of course , is that the things we need are close by .
And since the most sustainable trip is the one that you never had to make in the first place , suddenly our lives become instantly more sustainable .
And it is possible , of course , to increase the density of the communities around us .
Some places are doing this with new eco districts , developing whole new sustainable neighborhoods , which is nice work if you can get it , but most of the time , what were talking about is , in fact , reweaving the urban fabric that we already have .
So were talking about things like infill development : really sharp little changes to where we have buildings , where were developing .
Urban retrofitting : creating different sorts of spaces and uses out of places that are already there .
Increasingly , were realizing that we dont even need to densify an entire city .
What we need instead is an average density that rises to a level where we dont drive as much and so on .
And that can be done by raising the density in very specific spots a whole lot .
So you can think of it as tent poles that actually raise the density of the entire city .
And we find that when we do that , we can , in fact , have a few places that are really hyper - dense within a wider fabric of places that are perhaps a little more comfortable and achieve the same results .
Now we may find that there are places that are really , really dense and still hold onto their cars , but the reality is that , by and large , what we see when we get a lot of people together with the right conditions is a threshold effect , where people simply stop driving as much , and increasingly , more and more people , if theyre surrounded by places that make them feel at home , give up their cars altogether .
And this is a huge , huge energy savings , because what comes out of our tailpipe is really just the beginning of the story with climate emissions from cars .
We have the manufacture of the car , the disposal of the car , all of the parking and freeways and so on .
When you can get rid of all of those because somebody doesnt use any of them really , you find that you can actually cut transportation emissions as much as 90 percent .
And people are embracing this .
All around the world , were seeing more and more people embrace this walkshed life .
People are saying that its moving from the idea of the dream home to the dream neighborhood .
And when you layer that over with the kind of ubiquitous communications that were starting to see , what you find is , in fact , even more access suffused into spaces .
Some of its transportation access .
This is a Mapnificent map that shows me , in this case , how far I can get from my home in 30 minutes using public transportation .
Some of it is about walking . Its not all perfect yet .
This is Google Walking Maps .
I asked how to do the greater Ridgeway , and it told me to go via Guernsey .
It did tell me that this route maybe missing sidewalks or pedestrian paths , though .
But the technologies are getting better , and were starting to really kind of crowdsource this navigation .
And as we just heard earlier , of course , were also learning how to put information on dumb objects .
Things that dont have any wiring in them at all , were learning how to include in these systems of notation and navigation .
Part of what were finding with this is that what we thought was the major point of manufacturing and consumption , which is to get a bunch of stuff , is not , in fact , how we really live best in dense environments .
What were finding is that what we want is access to the capacities of things .
My favorite example is a drill . Who here owns a drill , a home power drill ?
Okay . I do too .
The average home power drill is used somewhere between six and 20 minutes in its entire lifetime , depending on who you ask .
And so what we do is we buy these drills that have a potential capacity of thousands of hours of drill time , use them once or twice to put a hole in the wall and let them sit .
Our cities , I would put to you , are stockpiles of these surplus capacities .
And while we could try and figure out new ways to use those capacities  -  -  such as cooking or making ice sculptures or even a mafia hit  -  -  what we probably will find is that , in fact , turning those products into services that we have access to when we want them , is a far smarter way to go .
And in fact , even space itself is turning into a service .
Were finding that people can share the same spaces , do stuff with vacant space .
Buildings are becoming bundles of services .
So we have new designs that are helping us take mechanical things that we used to spend energy on  -  -  like heating , cooling etc .  -  -  and turn them into things that we avoid spending energy on .
So we light our buildings with daylight .
We cool them with breezes . We heat them with sunshine .
In fact , when we use all these things , what weve found is that , in some cases , energy use in a building can drop as much as 90 percent .
Which brings on another threshold effect I like to call furnace dumping , which is , quite simply , if you have a building that doesnt need to be heated with a furnace , you save a whole bunch of money up front .
These things actually become cheaper to build than the alternatives .
Now when we look at being able to slash our product use , slash our transportation use , slash our building energy use , all of that is great , but it still leaves something behind .
And if were going to really , truly become sustainable cities , we need to think a little differently .
This is one way to do it .
This is Vancouvers propaganda about how green a city they are .
And certainly lots of people have taken to heart this idea that a sustainable city is covered in greenery .
So we have visions like this .
We have visions like this . We have visions like this .
Now all of these are fine projects , but they really have missed an essential point , which is its not about the leaves above , its about the systems below .
Do they , for instance , capture rainwater so that we can reduce water use ?
Water is energy intensive .
Do they , perhaps , include green infrastructure , so that we can take runoff and water thats going out of our houses and clean it and filter it and grow urban street trees ?
Do they connect us back to the ecosystems around us by , for example , connecting us to rivers and allowing for restoration ?
Do they allow for pollination , pollinator pathways that bees and butterflies and such can come back into our cities ?
Do they even take the very waste matter that we have from food and fiber and so forth , and turn it back into soil and sequester carbon  -  -  take carbon out of the air in the process of using our cities ?
I would submit to you that all of these things are not only possible , theyre being done right now , and that its a darn good thing .
Because right now , our economy by and large operates as Paul Hawken said ,  by stealing the future , selling it in the present and calling it GDP . 
And if we have another eight billion or seven billion , or six billion , even , people , living on a planet where their cities also steal the future , were going to run out of future really fast .
But if we think differently , I think that , in fact , we can have cities that are not only zero emissions , but have unlimited possibilities as well .
Thank you very much .
Angela Patton : A father - daughter dance ... in prison
At Camp Diva , Angela Patton works to help girls and fathers stay connected and in each others lives . But what about girls whose fathers cant be there  -  -  because theyre in jail ? Patton tells the story of a very special father - daughter dance .
I was sitting with my girls , and Joy said ,  Dang , I wish hed get off my back .
My daddy , he calls me all the time . 
 Lucky for you he calls at all ,  said Jasmine .
 I havent heard from my dad in years . 
At this moment , I knew the girls needed a way to connect with their fathers .
At Camp Diva , my non - profit organization , we have these types of conversations all the time as a way to help girls of African descent prepare for their passage into womanhood .
These girls just needed a way to invite their fathers into their lives on their own terms .
So I asked the girls ,  How can we help other girls develop healthy relationships with their fathers ? 
 Lets have a dance ,  one girl shouted , and all the girls quickly backed her up .
They started dreaming about the decorations , invitations , the dresses they were going to wear , and what their fathers could and could not wear .
It was off and running before I could even blink my eyes , but even if I could have slowed down those girls , I wouldnt have , because one thing that I have learned from over a decade of working with girls is that they already know what they need .
The wisdom lives inside of them .
As long as they have infrastructure , mentorship and resources , they can build what they need , not only to survive , but to thrive .
So we had a dance , and girls and their fathers came in multitudes .
They were dressed to the nines .
They acted sweet .
They acted silly .
They really enjoyed each others company .
It was a huge success .
And the girls decided to make it an annual event .
So as the seasons changed , and it was time to plan the dance again , one girl named Brianna spoke up , and she said ,  My dad cant come to the dance , and this whole thing is making me sad . 
 Why not ?  the girls asked .
 Because hes in jail ,  she bravely admitted .
 Well , can he just get out for a day ?  one of the girls asked .
 And come in shackles ?
Thats worse than not having him here at all . 
At this moment , I saw an opportunity for the girls to rise to the occasion and to become their own heroes .
So I asked ,  What do you think we should do about this ?
We want every girl to experience the dance , right ? 
So the girls thought for a moment , and one girl suggested ,  Why dont we just take the dance in the jail ? 
Most of the girls doubted the possibility of that , and said ,  Are you crazy ?
Who is going to allow a bunch of little girls , dressed up —   — to come inside a jail and dance with their daddies in Spongebob suits ? 
Because thats what they called them .
I said ,  Girls , well , well , you never know unless you ask . 
So a letter was written to the Richmond City Sheriff , signed collectively by each girl , and I would have to say , he is a very special sheriff .
He contacted me immediately and said , whenever there is an opportunity to bring families inside , his doors are always open .
Because one thing he did know , that when fathers are connected to their children , it is less likely that they will return .
So , 16 inmates and 18 girls were invited .
The girls were dressed in their Sunday best , and the fathers traded in their yellow and blue jumpsuits for shirts and ties .
They hugged .
They shared a full catered meal of chicken and fish .
They laughed together .
It was beautiful .
The fathers and daughters even experienced an opportunity to have a physical connection , something that a lot of them didnt even have for a while .
Fathers were in a space where they were able to make their daughters play , and pull out her chair and extend his hand for a dance .
Even the guards cried .
But after the dance , we all realized that Dad still would be in jail .
So we needed to create something that they could take with them .
So we brought in Flip cams , and we had them look at the Flip cams and just interview each other  -  -  their messages , their thoughts .
This was going to be used as a touchstone so when they started to miss each other and feel disconnected , they could reconnect through this image .
Ill never forget that one girl looked in her fathers eyes with that camera and said ,  Daddy , when you look at me , what do you see ? 
Because our daddies are our mirrors that we reflect back on when we decide about what type of man we deserve , and how they see us for the rest of our lives .
I know that very well , because I was one of the lucky girls .
I have had my father in my life always .
Hes even here today .
And that is why it is extremely special for me to make sure that these girls are connected to their fathers , especially those who are separated because of barbed wires and metal doors .
We have just created a form for girls who have heavy questions on their heart to be in a position to ask their fathers those questions and given the fathers the freedom to answer .
Because we know that the fathers are even leaving with this one thought : What type of woman am I preparing to put in the world ?
Because a father is locked in does not mean he should be locked out of his daughters life .
Dennis vanEngelsdorp : A plea for bees
Bees are dying in droves . Why ? Leading apiarist Dennis vanEngelsdorp looks at the gentle , misunderstood creatures important place in nature and the mystery behind its alarming disappearance .
What Id like you to do is , just really quickly , is just , sort of , nod to the person on your right , and then nod to the person on your left .
Now , chances are that over the last winter , if you had been a beehive , either you or one of the two people you just nodded at would have died .
Now , thats an awful lot of bees .
And this is the second year in a row we have lost over 30 percent of the colonies , or we estimate weve lost 30 percent of the colonies over the winter .
Now , thats a lot , a lot of bees , and thats really important .
And most of those losses are because of things we know .
We know that there are these varroa mites that have introduced and caused a lot of losses , and we also have this new phenomenon , which I talked about last year , Colony Collapse Disorder .
And here we see a picture on top of a hill in Central Valley last December .
And below , you can see all these out yards , or temporary yards , where the colonies are brought in until February , and then theyre shipped out to the almonds .
And one documentary writer , who was here and looked at this two months after I was here , described this not as beehives but as a graveyard , with these empty white boxes with no bees left in them .
Now , Im going to sum up a years worth of work in two sentences to say that we have been trying to figure out what the cause of this is .
And what we know is that its as if the bees have caught a flu .
And this flu has wiped through the population of bees .
In some cases , and in fact in most cases in one year , this flu was caused by a new virus to us , or newly identified by us , called Israeli Acute Paralysis virus .
It was called that because a guy in Israel first found it , and he now regrets profoundly calling it that disease , because , of course , theres the implication .
But we think this virus is pretty ubiquitous .
Its also pretty clear that the bees sometimes catch other viruses or other flus , and so the question were still struggling with , and the question that keeps us up at night , is why have the bees suddenly become so susceptible to this flu , and why are they so susceptible to these other diseases ?
And we dont have the answer to that yet , and we spend a lot of time trying to figure that out .
We think perhaps its a combination of factors .
We know from the work of a very large and dynamic working team that , you know , were finding a lot of different pesticides in the hive , and surprisingly , sometimes the healthiest hives have the most pesticides . And so we discover all these very strange things that we cant begin to understand .
And so this opens up the whole idea of looking at colony health .
Now of course , if you lose a lot of colonies , beekeepers can replace them very quickly .
And thats why weve been able to recover from a lot of loss .
If we lost one in every three cows in the winter , you know , the National Guard would be out .
But what beekeepers can do is , if they have one surviving colony , they can split that colony in two .
And then the one half that doesnt have a queen , they can buy a queen .
It comes in the mail ; it can come from Australia or Hawaii or Florida , and you can introduce that queen .
And in fact , America was the first country that ever did mail - delivery queens and in fact , its part of the postal code that you have to deliver queens by mail in order to make sure that we have enough bees in this country .
If you dont just want a queen , you can buy , actually , a three - pound package of bees , which comes in the mail , and of course , the Postal Office is always very concerned when they get , you know , your three - pound packages of bees .
And you can install this in your hive and replace that dead - out .
So it means that beekeepers are very good at replacing dead - outs , and so theyve been able to cover those losses .
So even though weve lost 30 percent of the colonies every year , the same number of colonies have existed in the country , at about 2.4 million colonies .
Now , those losses are tragic on many fronts , and one of those fronts is for the beekeeper .
And its really important to talk about beekeepers first , because beekeepers are among the most fascinating people youll ever meet .
If this was a group of beekeepers , you would have everyone from the card - carrying NRA member whos , you know , live free or die , to the , you know , the self - expressed quirky San Francisco backyard pig farmer .
And you get all of these people in the same room , and theyre all engaged and theyre getting along , and theyre all there because of the passion for bees .
Now , theres another part of that community which are the commercial beekeepers , the ones who make their livelihood from beekeeping alone .
And these tend to be some of the most independent , tenacious , intuitive , you know , inventive people you will ever meet .
Theyre just fascinating . And theyre like that all over the world .
I had the privilege of working in Haiti just for two weeks earlier this year .
And Haiti , if youve ever been there , is just a tragedy .
I mean , there may be 100 explanations for why Haiti is the impoverished nation it is , but there is no excuse to see that sort of squalor .
But you meet this beekeeper , and I met this beekeeper here , and he is one of the most knowledgeable beekeepers Ive ever met .
No formal education , but very knowledgeable .
We needed beeswax for a project we were working on ; he was so capable , he was able to render the nicest block of beeswax I have ever seen from cow dung , tin cans and his veil , which he used as a screening , right in this meadow . And so that ingenuity is inspiring .
We also have Dave Hackenberg , who is the poster child of CCD .
Hes the one who first identified this condition and raised the alarm bells .
And he has a history of these trucks , and hes moved these bees up and down the coast .
And a lot of people talk about trucks and moving bees , and that being bad , but weve done that for thousands of years .
The ancient Egyptians used to move bees up and down the Nile on rafts , so this idea of a movable bee force is not new at all .
And one of our real worries with Colony Collapse Disorder is the fact that it costs so much money to replace those dead - out colonies .
And you can do that one year in a row , you may be able to do it two years in a row .
But if youre losing 50 percent to 80 percent of your colonies , you cant survive three years in a row . And were really worried about losing this segment of our industry .
And thats important for many fronts , and one of them is because of that culture thats in agriculture .
And these migratory beekeepers are the last nomads of America .
You know , they pick up their hives ; they move their families once or twice in a year .
And if you look at Florida , in Dade City , Florida , thats where all the Pennsylvania beekeepers go .
And then 20 miles down the road is Groveland , and thats where all the Wisconsin beekeepers go .
And if youre ever in Central Valley in February , you go to this café at 10 oclock in the morning , Kathy and Kates .
And thats where all the beekeepers come after a night of moving bees into the almond groves .
They all have their breakfast and complain about everyone right there . And its a great experience , and I really encourage you to drop in at that diner during that time , because thats quite essential American experience .
And we see these families , these nomadic families , you know , father to son , father to son , and these guys are hurting .
And theyre not people who like to ask for help , although they are the most helpful people ever .
If theres one guy who loses all his bees because of a truck overhaul , everyone pitches in and gives 20 hives to help him replace those lost colonies .
And so , its a very dynamic , and I think , historic and exciting community to be involved with .
Of course , the real importance for bees is not the honey .
And although I highly encourage you , all use honey .
I mean , its the most ethical sweetener , and you know , its a dynamic and fun sweetener .
But we estimate that about one in three bites of food we eat is directly or indirectly pollinated by honeybees .
Now , I want to just illustrate that in the fact that if we look at the breakfast I had yesterday morning  -  -  a little cranberry juice , some fruits , some granola , I should have had whole wheat bread , I realized , but you know , jam on my Wonderbread , and some coffee  -  -  and had we taken out all those ingredients ,  -  -  except for the almonds I wasnt going to pick out from the granola  -  -  if we had taken out all those ingredients the bees had indirectly or directly pollinated , we wouldnt have much on our plate .
So if we did not have bees , its not like we would starve , but clearly our diet would be diminished .
Its said that for bees , the flower is the fountain of life , and for flowers bees are the messengers of love .
And thats a really great expression , because really , bees are the sex workers for flowers . They are , you know  -  -  they get paid for their services .
They get paid by pollen and nectar , to move that male sperm , the pollen , from flower to flower .
And there are flowers that are self - infertile . That means they cant  -  -  the pollen in their bloom cant fertilize themselves .
So in an apple orchard , for instance , youll have rows of 10 apples of one variety , and then you have another apple tree thats a different type of pollen .
And bees are very faithful .
When theyre out pollinating or gathering pollen from one flower , they stay to that crop exclusively , in order to help generate .
And of course , theyre made to carry this pollen .
They build up a static electric charge and the pollen jumps on them and helps spread that pollen from bloom to bloom .
However , honeybees are a minority .
Honeybees are not native to America ; they were introduced with the colonialists .
And there are actually more species of bees than there are mammals and birds combined .
In Pennsylvania alone , we have been surveying bees for 150 years , and very intensely in the last three years .
We have identified over 400 species of bees in Pennsylvania .
Thirty - two species have not been identified or found in the state since 1950 .
Now , that could be because we havent been sampling right , but it does , I think , suggest that somethings wrong with the pollinator force . And these bees are fascinating .
We have bumblebees on the top .
And bumblebees are what we call eusocial : theyre not truly social , because only the queen is , over winter .
We also have the sweat bees , and these are little gems flying around .
Theyre like tiny little flies and they fly around .
And then you have another type of bee , which we call kleptoparasites , which is a very fancy way of saying , bad - minded , murdering  -  -  whats the word Im looking for ? Murdering  -  -  Audience : Bee ?
Dennis vanEngelsdorp : Bee . Okay , thanks .
What these bees do is , they sit there . These solitary bees , they drill a hole in the ground or drill a hole in a branch , and they collect pollen and make it into a ball , and they lay an egg on it .
Well , these bees hang out at that hole , and they wait for that mother to fly away , they go in , eat the egg , and lay their own egg there . So they dont do any work .
And so , in fact , if you know you have these kleptoparasitic bees , you know that your environment is healthy , because theyre top - of - the - food - chain bees .
And in fact , there is now a red list of pollinators that were worried have disappeared , and on top of that list are a lot of these kleptoparasites , but also these bumblebees .
And in fact , if you guys live on the West Coast , go to these websites here , and theyre really looking for people to look for some of these bumblebees , because we think some have gone extinct . Or some , the population has declined .
And so its not just honeybees that are in trouble , but we dont understand these native pollinators or all those other parts of our community .
And of course , bees are not the only important factor here .
There are other animals that pollinate , like bats , and bats are in trouble too .
And Im glad Im a bee man and not a bat man , because theres no money to research the bat problems .
And bats are dying at an extraordinary rate .
White - nose syndrome has wiped out populations of bats .
If theres a cave in New York that had 15,000 bats in it , and there are 1,000 left . Thats like San Francisco becoming the population of half of this county in three years .
And so thats incredible . And theres no money to do that .
But Im glad to say that I think we know the cause of all these conditions , and that cause is NDD : Nature Deficit Disorder .
And that is that I think that what we have in our society is , we forgot our connection with nature .
And I think if we reconnect to nature , well be able to have the resources and that interest to solve these problems .
And I think that there is an easy cure for NDD .
And that is , make meadows and not lawns .
And I think we have lost our connection , and this is a wonderful way of reconnecting to our environment .
Ive had the privilege of living by a meadow for the last little while , and it is terribly engaging .
And if we look at the history of lawns , its actually rather tragic .
It used to be , two , three hundred years ago , that a lawn was a symbol of prestige , and so it was only the very rich that could keep these green actually , deserts : theyre totally sterile .
Americans spent , in 2001  -  -  11 percent of all pesticide use was done on lawns .
Five percent of our greenhouse gases are produced by mowing our lawns .
And so its incredible the amount of resources weve spent keeping our lawns , which are these useless biosystems .
And so we need to rethink this idea .
In fact , you know , the White House used to have sheep in front in order to help fund the war effort in World War I , which probably is not a bad idea ; it wouldnt be a bad idea .
I want to say this not because Im opposed completely to mowing lawns .
I think that there is perhaps some advantage to keeping lawns at a limited scale , and I think were encouraged to do that .
But I also want to reinforce some of the ideas weve heard here , because having a meadow or living by a meadow is transformational .
That it is amazing that connection we can have with whats there .
These milkweed plants have grown up in my meadow over the last four years . Add to watch the different plants , or insects , that come to these flowers , to watch that  -  -  and weve heard about , you know , this relationship you can have with wine , this companion you can have as it matures and as it has these different fragrances .
And this is a companion , and this is a relationship that never dries up .
You never run out of that companion as you drink this wine , too .
And I encourage you to look at that .
Now , not all of us have meadows , or lawns that we can convert , and so you can always , of course , grow a meadow in a pot .
Bees apparently , can be the gateway to , you know , other things .
So Im not saying that you should plant a meadow of pot , but a pot in a meadow .
But you can also have this great community of city or building - top beekeepers , these beekeepers that live  -  -  This is in Paris where these beekeepers live .
And everyone should open a beehive , because it is the most amazing , incredible thing .
And if we want to cure ourselves of NDD , or Nature Deficit Disorder , I think this is a great way of doing it .
Get a beehive and grow a meadow , and watch that life come back into your life .
And so with that , I think that what we can do , if we do this , we can make sure that our future  -  -  our more perfect future  -  -  includes beekeepers and it includes bees and it includes those meadows .
And that journey  -  -  that journey of transformation that occurs as you grow your meadow and as you keep your bees or you watch those native bees there  -  -  is an extremely exciting one .
And I hope that you experience it and I hope you tell me about it one day .
So thank you very much for being here . Thank you very much .
Danielle de Niese : A flirtatious aria
Can opera be ever - so - slightly sexy ? The glorious soprano Danielle de Niese shows how , singing the flirty  Meine Lippen , sie küssen so heiss .  Which , translated , means , as you might guess :  I kiss so hot .  From Giuditta by Frans Lehár ; accompanist : Ingrid Surgenor .
I dont understand myself , why they keep talking of love , if they come near me , if they look into my eyes and kiss my hand . I dont understand myself , why they talk of magic , that no one withstands , if he sees me , if he passes by . But if the red light is on in the middle of the night and everybody listens to my song , then it is plain to see . My lips , they give so fiery a kiss , my limbs , they are supple and white . It is written for me in the stars , thou shalt kiss , thou shalt love . My feet , they glide and float , my eyes , they lure and glow . And I dance as if entranced , cause I know , my lips give so fiery a kiss . In my veins , runs a dancers blood , because my beautiful mother was the Queen of dance in the gilded Alcazar . She was so very beautiful , I often saw her in my dreams . If she beat the tambourine to her beguiling dance , all eyes were glowing admiringly . She reawakened in me , mine is the same lot . I dance like her at midnight and from deep within I feel : My lips , they give so fiery a kiss , my limbs , they are supple and white . It is written for me in the stars , thou shalt kiss , thou shalt love . And I dance as if entranced , cause I know , my lips give so fiery a kiss .
Eve Ensler : Embrace your inner girl
In this passionate talk , Eve Ensler declares that there is a girl cell in us all  -  -  a cell that we have all been taught to suppress . She tells heartfelt stories of girls around the world who have overcome shocking adversity and violence to reveal the astonishing strength of being a girl .
Namaste . Good morning .
Im very happy to be here in India .
And Ive been thinking a lot about what I have learned over these last particularly 11 years with V - Day and  The Vagina Monologues ,  traveling the world , essentially meeting with women and girls across the planet to stop violence against women .
What I want to talk about today is this particular cell , or grouping of cells , that is in each and every one of us .
And I want to call it the girl cell .
And its in men as well as in women .
I want you to imagine that this particular grouping of cells is central to the evolution of our species and the continuation of the human race .
And I want you imagine that at some point in history a group of powerful people invested in owning and controlling the world understood that the suppression of this particular cell , the oppression of these cells , the reinterpretation of these cells , the undermining of these cells , getting us to believe in the weakness of these cells and the crushing , eradicating , destroying , reducing these cells , basically began the process of killing off the girl cell , which was , by the way , patriarchy .
I want you to imagine that the girl is a chip in the huge macrocosm of collective consciousness .
And it is essential to balance , to wisdom and to actually the future of all of us .
And then I want you to imagine that this girl cell is compassion , and its empathy , and its passion itself , and its vulnerability , and its openness , and its intensity , and its association , and its relationship , and it is intuitive .
And then lets think how compassion informs wisdom , and that vulnerability is our greatest strength , and that emotions have inherent logic , which lead to radical , appropriate , saving action .
And then lets remember that weve been taught the exact opposite by the powers that be , that compassion clouds your thinking , that it gets in the way , that vulnerability is weakness , that emotions are not to be trusted , and youre not supposed to take things personally , which is one of my favorites .
I think the whole world has essentially been brought up not to be a girl .
How do we bring up boys ? What does it mean to be a boy ?
To be a boy really means not to be a girl .
To be a man means not to be a girl .
To be a woman means not to be a girl .
To be strong means not to be a girl .
To be a leader means not to be a girl .
I actually think that being a girl is so powerful that weve had to train everyone not to be that .
And Id also like to say that the irony of course , is that denying girl , suppressing girl , suppressing emotion , refusing feeling has lead thus here .
Where we have now come to live in a world where the most horrific poverty , genocide , mass rapes , the destruction of the Earth , is completely out of control .
And because we have suppressed our girl cells and suppressed our girl - ship , we do not feel what is going on .
So , we are not being charged with the adequate response to what is happening .
I want to talk a little bit about the Democratic Republic of Congo .
For me , it was the turning point of my life .
I have spent a lot of time there in the last three years .
I feel up to that point I had seen a lot in the world , a lot of violence .
I essentially lived in the rape mines of the world for the last 12 years .
But the Democratic Republic of Congo really was the turning point in my soul .
I went and I spent time in a place called Bukavu in a hospital called the Panzi Hospital , with a doctor who was as close to a saint as any person Ive ever met .
His name is Dr . Denis Mukwege .
there has been a war raging for the last 12 years , a war that has killed nearly six million people .
It is estimated that somewhere between 300,000 and 500,000 women have been raped there .
When I spent my first weeks at Panzi hospital I sat with women who sat and lined up every day to tell me their stories .
Their stories were so horrific , and so mind - blowing and so on the other side of human existence , that to be perfectly honest with you , I was shattered .
And I will tell you that what happened is through that shattering , listening to the stories of eight - year - old girls who had their insides eviscerated , who had guns and bayonets and things shoved inside them so they had holes , literally , inside them where their pee and poop came out of them .
Listening to the story of 80 - year - old women who were tied to chains and circled , and where groups of men would come and rape them periodically , all in the name of economic exploitation to steal the minerals so the West can have it and profit from them .
My mind was so shattered .
But what happened for me is that that shattering actually emboldened me in a way I have never been emboldened .
That shattering , that opening of my girl cell , that kind of massive breakthrough of my heart allowed me to become more courageous , and braver , and actually more clever than I had been in the past in my life .
I want to say that I think the powers that be know that empire - building is actually  -  -  that feelings get in the way of empire - building .
Feelings get in the way of the mass acquisition of the Earth , and excavating the Earth , and destroying things .
I remember , for example , when my father , who was very , very violent , used to beat me .
And he would actually say , while he was beating me ,  Dont you cry . Dont you dare cry . 
Because my crying somehow exposed his brutality to him .
And even in the moment he didnt want to be reminded of what he was doing .
I know that we have systematically annihilated the girl cell .
And I want to say weve annihilated it in men as well as in women .
And I think in some ways weve been much harsher to men in the annihilation of their girl cell .
I see how boys have been brought up , and I see this across the planet : to be tough , to be hardened , to distance themselves from their tenderness , to not cry .
I actually realized once in Kosovo , when I watched a man break down , that bullets are actually hardened tears , that when we dont allow men to have their girl self and have their vulnerability , and have their compassion , and have their hearts , that they become hardened and hurtful and violent .
And I think we have taught men to be secure when they are insecure , to pretend they know things when they dont know things , or why would we be where we are ?
To pretend theyre not a mess when they are a mess .
And I will tell you a very funny story .
On my way here on the airplane , I was walking up and down the aisle of the plane .
And all these men , literally at least 10 men , were in their little seats watching chick flicks .
And they were all alone , and I thought ,  This is the secret life of men . 
Ive traveled , as I said , to many , many countries , and Ive seen , if we do what we do to the girl inside us then obviously its horrific to think what we do to girls in the world .
And we heard from Sunitha yesterday , and Kavita about what we do to girls .
But I just want to say that Ive met girls with knife wounds and cigarette burns , who are literally being treated like ashtrays .
Ive seen girls be treated like garbage cans .
Ive seen girls who were beaten by their mothers and brothers and fathers and uncles .
Ive seen girls starving themselves to death in America in institutions to look like some idealized version of themselves .
Ive seen that we cut girls and we control them and we keep them illiterate , or we make them feel bad about being too smart .
We silence them . We make them feel guilty for being smart . We get them to behave , to tone it down , not to be too intense .
We sell them , we kill them as embryos , we enslave them , we rape them .
We are so accustomed to robbing girls of the subject of being the subjects of their lives that we have now actually objectified them and turned them into commodities .
The selling of girls is rampant across the planet .
And in many places they are worth less than goats and cows .
But I also want to talk about the fact that if one in eight people on the planet are girls between the ages of 10 to 24 , they are they key , really , in the developing world , as well as in the whole world , to the future of humanity .
And if girls are in trouble because they face systematic disadvantages that keep them where society wants them to be , including lack of access to healthcare , education , healthy foods , labor force participation .
The burden of all the household tasks usually falls on girls and younger siblings , which ensures that they will never overcome these barriers .
The state of girls , the condition of girls , will , in my belief  -  -  and thats the girl inside us and the girl in the world  -  -  determine whether the species survives .
And what I want to suggest is that , having talked to girls , because I just finished a new book called  I Am an Emotional Creature : The Secret Life of Girls Around the World ,  Ive been talking to girls for five years , and one of the things that Ive seen is true everywhere is that the verb thats been enforced on girl is the verb  to please . 
Girls are trained to please .
I want to change the verb .
I want us all to change the verb .
I want the verb to be  educate ,  or  activate ,  or  engage ,  or  confront ,  or  defy ,  or  create . 
If we teach girls to change the verb we will actually enforce the girl inside us and the girl inside them .
And I have to now share a few stories of girls Ive seen across the planet who have engaged their girl , all the circumstances around them .
I know a 14 - year - old girl in the Netherlands , for example , who is demanding that she take a boat and go around the entire world by herself .
There is a teenage girl who just recently went out and knew that she needed 56 stars tattooed on the right side of her face .
There is a girl , Julia Butterfly Hill , who lived for a year in a tree because she wanted to protect the wild oaks .
There is a girl who I met 14 years ago in Afghanistan who I have adopted as my daughter because her mother was killed . Her mother was a revolutionary .
And this girl , when she was 17 years old , wore a burqa in Afghanistan , and went into the stadiums and documented the atrocities that were going on towards women , underneath her burqa , with a video .
And that video became the video that went out all over the world after 9 / 11 to show what was going on in Afghanistan .
I want to talk about Rachel Corrie who was in her teens when she stood in front of an Israeli tank to say ,  End the occupation . 
And she knew she risked death and she was literally gunned down and rolled over by that tank .
And I want to talk about a girl that I just met recently in Bukavu , who was impregnated by her rapist .
And she was holding her baby .
And I asked her if she loved her baby .
And she looked into her babys eyes and she said ,  Of course I love my baby . How could I not love my baby ?
Its my baby and its full of love . 
The capacity for girls to overcome situations and to move on levels , to me , is mind - blowing .
There is a girl named Dorcas , and I just met her in Kenya .
Dorcas is 15 years old , and she was trained in self - defense .
A few months ago she was picked up on the street by three older men .
They kidnapped her , they put her in a car .
And through her self - defense , she grabbed their Adams apples , she punched them in the eyes and she got herself free and out of the car .
In Kenya , in August , I went to visit one of the V - Day safe houses for girls , a house we opened seven years ago with an amazing woman named Agnes Pareyio .
Agnes was a woman who was cut when she was a little girl , she was female genitally mutilated .
And she made a decision as many women do across this planet , that what was done to her would not be enforced and done to other women and girls .
So , for years Agnes walked through the Rift valley .
She taught girls what a healthy vagina looked like , and what a mutilated vagina looked like .
And in that time she saved many girls . And when we met her we asked her what we could do for her , and she said ,  Well , if you got me a Jeep I could get around a lot faster . 
So , we got her a Jeep . And then she saved 4,500 girls .
And then we asked her ,  Okay , what else do you need ? 
And she said ,  Well , now , I need a house . 
So , seven years ago Agnes built the first V - Day safe house in Narok , Kenya , in the Masai land .
And it was a house where girls could run away , they could save their clitoris , they wouldnt be cut , they could go to school .
And in the years that Agnes has had the house , she has changed the situation there .
She has literally become deputy mayor .
Shes changed the rules .
The whole community has bought in to what shes doing .
When we were there she was doing a ritual where she reconciles girls , who have run away , with their families .
And there was a young girl named Jaclyn .
Jaclyn was 14 years old and she was in her Masai family and theres a drought in Kenya .
So cows are dying , and cows are the most valued possession .
And Jaclyn overheard her father talking to an old man about how he was about to sell her for the cows .
And she knew that meant she would be cut .
She knew that meant she wouldnt go to school .
She knew that meant she wouldnt have a future .
She knew she would have to marry that old man , and she was 14 .
So , one afternoon , shed heard about the safe house , Jaclyn left her fathers house and she walked for two days , two days through Masai land .
She slept with the hyenas . She hid at night .
She imagined her father killing her on one hand , and Mama Agnes greeting her , with the hope that she would greet her when she got to the house .
And when she got to the house she was greeted .
Agnes took her in , and Agnes loved her , and Agnes supported her for the year .
She went to school and she found her voice , and she found her identity , and she found her heart .
Then , her time was ready when she had to go back to talk to her father about the reconciliation , after a year .
I had the privilege of being in the hut when she was reunited with her father and reconciled .
In that hut , we walked in , and her father and his four wives were sitting there , and her sisters who had just returned because they had all fled when she had fled , and her primary mother , who had been beaten in standing up for her with the elders .
When her father saw her and saw who she had become , in her full girl self , he threw his arms around her and broke down crying .
He said ,  You are beautiful . You have grown into a gorgeous woman .
We will not cut you .
And I give you my word , here and now , that we will not cut your sisters either . 
And what she said to him was ,  You were willing to sell me for four cows , and a calf and some blankets .
But I promise you , now that I will be educated I will always take care of you , and I will come back and I will build you a house .
And I will be in your corner for the rest of your life . 
For me , that is the power of girls .
And that is the power of transformation .
I want to close today with a new piece from my book .
And I want to do it tonight for the girl in everybody here .
And I want to do it for Sunitha .
And I want to do it for the girls that Sunitha talked about yesterday , the girls who survive , the girls who can become somebody else .
But I really want to do it for each and every person here , to value the girl in us , to value the part that cries , to value the part thats emotional , to value the part thats vulnerable , to understand thats where the future lies .
This is called  Im An Emotional Creature . 
And it happened because I met a girl in Watts , L.A .
I was asking girls if they like being a girl , and all the girls were like ,  No , I hate it . I cant stand it .
Its all bad . My brothers get everything . 
And this girl just sat up and went ,  I love being a girl .
Im an emotional creature ! 
This is for her : I love being a girl .
I can feel what youre feeling as youre feeling inside the feeling before .
I am an emotional creature .
Things do not come to me as intellectual theories or hard - pressed ideas .
They pulse through my organs and legs and burn up my ears .
Oh , I know when your girlfriends really pissed off , even though she appears to give you what you want .
I know when a storm is coming .
I can feel the invisible stirrings in the air .
I can tell you he wont call back . Its a vibe I share .
I am an emotional creature .
I love that I do not take things lightly .
Everything is intense to me , the way I walk in the street , the way my momma wakes me up , the way its unbearable when I lose , the way I hear bad news .
I am an emotional creature .
I am connected to everything and everyone . I was born like that .
Dont you say all negative that its only only a teenage thing , or its only because Im a girl .
These feelings make me better .
They make me present . They make me ready . They make me strong .
I am an emotional creature .
There is a particular way of knowing .
Its like the older women somehow forgot .
I rejoice that its still in my body .
Oh , I know when the coconuts about to fall .
I know we have pushed the Earth too far .
I know my father isnt coming back , and that no ones prepared for the fire .
I know that lipstick means more than show , and boys are super insecure , and so - called terrorists are made , not born .
I know that one kiss could take away all my decision - making ability .
And you know what ? Sometimes it should .
This is not extreme . Its a girl thing , what we would all be if the big door inside us flew open .
Dont tell me not to cry , to calm it down , not to be so extreme , to be reasonable .
I am an emotional creature .
Its how the earth got made , how the wind continues to pollinate .
You dont tell the Atlantic Ocean to behave .
I am an emotional creature .
Why would you want to shut me down or turn me off ?
I am your remaining memory .
I can take you back .
Nothings been diluted .
Nothings leaked out .
I love , hear me , I love that I can feel the feelings inside you , even if they stop my life , even if they break my heart , even if they take me off track , they make me responsible .
I am an emotional , I am an emotional , incondotional , devotional creature .
And I love , hear me , I love , love , love being a girl .
Can you say it with me ?
I love , I love , love , love being a girl !
Thank you very much .
Rives : The 4 a.m . mystery
Poet Rives does 8 minutes of lyrical origami , folding history into a series of coincidences surrounding that most surreal of hours , 4 oclock in the morning .
This is a recent comic strip from the Los Angeles Times .
The punch line ?
 On the other hand , I dont have to get up at four every single morning to milk my Labrador . 
This is a recent cover of New York Magazine .
Best hospitals where doctors say they would go for cancer treatment , births , strokes , heart disease , hip replacements , 4 a.m . emergencies .
And this is a song medley I put together  -  -  Did you ever notice that four in the morning has become some sort of meme or shorthand ?
It means something like you are awake at the worst possible hour .
A time for inconveniences , mishaps , yearnings .
A time for plotting to whack the chief of police , like in this classic scene from  The Godfather . 
Coppolas script describes these guys as ,  exhausted in shirt sleeves .
It is four in the morning . 
A time for even grimmer stuff than that , like autopsies and embalmings in Isabel Allendes  The House of the Spirits . 
After the breathtaking green - haired Rosa is murdered , the doctors preserve her with unguents and morticians paste .
They worked until four oclock in the morning .
A time for even grimmer stuff than that , like in last Aprils New Yorker magazine .
This short fiction piece by Martin Amis starts out ,  On September 11 , 2001 , he opened his eyes at 4 a.m . in Portland , Maine , and Mohamed Attas last day began . 
For a time that I find to be the most placid and uneventful hour of the day , four in the morning sure gets an awful lot of bad press  -  -  across a lot of different media from a lot of big names .
And it made me suspicious .
I figured , surely some of the most creative artistic minds in the world , really , arent all defaulting back to this one easy trope like they invented it , right ?
Could it be there is something more going on here ?
Something deliberate , something secret , and who got the four in the morning bad rap ball rolling anyway ?
I say this guy  -  -  Alberto Giacometti , shown here with some of his sculptures on the Swiss 100 franc note .
He did it with this famous piece from the New York Museum of Modern Art .
Its title  -  -   The Palace at Four in the Morning  -  -  1932 .
Not just the earliest cryptic reference to four in the morning I can find .
I believe that this so - called first surrealist sculpture may provide an incredible key to virtually every artistic depiction of four in the morning to follow it .
I call this The Giacometti Code , a TED exclusive .
No , feel free to follow along on your Blackberries or your iPhones if youve got them .
It works a little something like  -  -  this is a recent Google search for four in the morning .
Results vary , of course . This is pretty typical .
The top 10 results yield you four hits for Faron Youngs song ,  Its Four in the Morning ,  three hits for Judi Denchs film ,  Four in the Morning ,  one hit for Wislawa Szymborskas poem ,  Four in the Morning . 
But what , you may ask , do a Polish poet , a British Dame , a country music hall of famer all have in common besides this totally excellent Google ranking ?
Well , lets start with Faron Young  -  -  who was born incidentally in 1932 .
In 1996 , he shot himself in the head on December ninth  -  -  which incidentally is Judi Denchs birthday .
But he didnt die on Denchs birthday .
He languished until the following afternoon when he finally succumbed to a supposedly self - inflicted gunshot wound at the age of 64  -  -  which incidentally is how old Alberto Giacometti was when he died .
Where was Wislawa Szymborska during all this ?
She has the worlds most absolutely watertight alibi .
On that very day , December 10 , 1996 while Mr. Four in the Morning , Faron Young , was giving up the ghost in Nashville , Tennessee , Ms. Four in the Morning  -  -  or one of them anyway  -  -  Wislawa Szymborska was in Stockholm , Sweden , accepting the Nobel Prize for Literature .
100 years to the day after the death of Alfred Nobel himself .
Coincidence ? No , its creepy .
Coincidence to me has a much simpler metric .
Thats like me telling you ,  Hey , you know the Nobel Prize was established in 1901 , which coincidentally is the same year Alberto Giacometti was born ? 
No , not everything fits so tidily into the paradigm , but that does not mean theres not something going on at the highest possible levels .
In fact there are people in this room who may not want me to show you this clip were about to see .
Homer Simpson : We have a tennis court , a swimming pool , a screening room  -  -  You mean if I want pork chops , even in the middle of the night , your guy will fry them up ?
Herbert Powell : Sure , thats what hes paid for .
Now do you need towels , laundry , maids ?
HS : Wait , wait , wait , wait , wait , wait  -  -  let me see if I got this straight .
It is Christmas Day , 4 a.m .
Theres a rumble in my stomach .
Marge Simpson : Homer , please .
Rives : Wait , wait , wait , wait , wait , wait , wait .
Let me see if I got this straight , Matt .
When Homer Simpson needs to imagine the most remote possible moment of not just the clock , but the whole freaking calendar , he comes up with 0400 on the birthday of the Baby Jesus .
And no , I dont know how it works into the whole puzzling scheme of things , but obviously I know a coded message when I see one .
I said , I know a coded message when I see one .
And folks , you can buy a copy of Bill Clintons  My Life  from the bookstore here at TED .
Parse it cover to cover for whatever hidden references you want .
Or you can go to the Random House website where there is this excerpt .
And how far down into it you figure well have to scroll to get to the golden ticket ?
Would you believe about a dozen paragraphs ?
This is page 474 on your paperbacks if youre following along :  Though it was getting better , I still wasnt satisfied with the inaugural address .
My speechwriters must have been tearing their hair out because as we worked between one and four in the morning on Inauguration Day , I was still changing it . 
Sure you were , because youve prepared your entire life for this historic quadrennial event that just sort of sneaks up on you .
And then  -  -  three paragraphs later we get this little beauty :  We went back to Blair House to look at the speech for the last time .
It had gotten a lot better since 4 a.m . 
Well , how could it have ?
By his own writing , this man was either asleep , at a prayer meeting with Al and Tipper or learning how to launch a nuclear missile out of a suitcase .
What happens to American presidents at 0400 on inauguration day ?
What happened to William Jefferson Clinton ?
We might not ever know .
And I noticed , hes not exactly around here today to face any tough questions .
It could get awkward , right ?
I mean after all , this whole business happened on his watch .
But if he were here  -  -  he might remind us , as he does in the wrap - up to his fine autobiography , that on this day Bill Clinton began a journey  -  -  a journey that saw him go on to become the first Democrat president elected to two consecutive terms in decades .
In generations .
The first since this man , Franklin Delano Roosevelt , who began his own unprecedented journey way back at his own first election , way back in a simpler time , way back in 1932  -  -  the year Alberto Giacometti made  The Palace at Four in the Morning . 
The year , lets remember , that this voice , now departed , first came a - cryin into this big old crazy world of ours .
George Dyson : The birth of the computer
Historian George Dyson tells stories from the birth of the modern computer  -  -  from its 17th - century origins to the hilarious notebooks of some early computer engineers .
Last year , I told you the story , in seven minutes , of Project Orion , which was this very implausible technology that technically could have worked , but it had this one - year political window where it could have happened .
So it didnt happen . It was a dream that did not happen .
This year Im going to tell you the story of the birth of digital computing .
This was a perfect introduction .
And its a story that did work . It did happen , and the machines are all around us .
And it was a technology that was inevitable .
If the people Im going to tell you the story about , if they hadnt done it , somebody else would have .
So , it was sort of the right idea at the right time .
This is Barricellis universe . This is the universe we live in now .
Its the universe in which these machines are now doing all these things , including changing biology .
Im starting the story with the first atomic bomb at Trinity , which was the Manhattan Project . It was a little bit like TED : it brought a whole lot of very smart people together .
And three of the smartest people were Stan Ulam , Richard Feynman and John von Neumann .
And it was Von Neumann who said , after the bomb , he was working on something much more important than bombs : hes thinking about computers .
So , he wasnt only thinking about them ; he built one . This is the machine he built .
He built this machine , and we had a beautiful demonstration of how this thing really works , with these little bits . And its an idea that goes way back .
The first person to really explain that was Thomas Hobbes , who , in 1651 , explained how arithmetic and logic are the same thing , and if you want to do artificial thinking and artificial logic , you can do it all with arithmetic .
He said you needed addition and subtraction .
Leibniz , who came a little bit later  -  -  this is 1679  -  -  showed that you didnt even need subtraction .
You could do the whole thing with addition .
Here , we have all the binary arithmetic and logic that drove the computer revolution .
And Leibniz was the first person to really talk about building such a machine .
He talked about doing it with marbles , having gates and what we now call shift registers , where you shift the gates , drop the marbles down the tracks .
And thats what all these machines are doing , except , instead of doing it with marbles , theyre doing it with electrons .
And then we jump to Von Neumann , 1945 , when he sort of reinvents the whole same thing .
And 1945 , after the war , the electronics existed to actually try and build such a machine .
So June 1945  -  -  actually , the bomb hasnt even been dropped yet  -  -  and Von Neumann is putting together all the theory to actually build this thing , which also goes back to Turing , who , before that , gave the idea that you could do all this with a very brainless , little , finite state machine , just reading a tape in and reading a tape out .
The other sort of genesis of what Von Neumann did was the difficulty of how you would predict the weather .
Lewis Richardson saw how you could do this with a cellular array of people , giving them each a little chunk , and putting it together .
Here , we have an electrical model illustrating a mind having a will , but capable of only two ideas .
And thats really the simplest computer .
Its basically why you need the qubit , because it only has two ideas .
And you put lots of those together , you get the essentials of the modern computer : the arithmetic unit , the central control , the memory , the recording medium , the input and the output .
But , theres one catch . This is the fatal  -  -  you know , we saw it in starting these programs up .
The instructions which govern this operation must be given in absolutely exhaustive detail .
So , the programming has to be perfect , or it wont work .
If you look at the origins of this , the classic history sort of takes it all back to the ENIAC here .
But actually , the machine Im going to tell you about , the Institute for Advanced Study machine , which is way up there , really should be down there . So , Im trying to revise history , and give some of these guys more credit than theyve had .
Such a computer would open up universes , which are , at the present , outside the range of any instruments .
So it opens up a whole new world , and these people saw it .
The guy who was supposed to build this machine was the guy in the middle , Vladimir Zworykin , from RCA .
RCA , in probably one of the lousiest business decisions of all time , decided not to go into computers .
But the first meetings , November 1945 , were at RCAs offices .
RCA started this whole thing off , and said , you know , televisions are the future , not computers .
The essentials were all there  -  -  all the things that make these machines run .
Von Neumann , and a logician , and a mathematician from the army put this together . Then , they needed a place to build it .
When RCA said no , thats when they decided to build it in Princeton , where Freeman works at the Institute .
Thats where I grew up as a kid .
Thats me , thats my sister Esther , whos talked to you before , so we both go back to the birth of this thing .
Thats Freeman , a long time ago , and that was me .
And this is Von Neumann and Morgenstern , who wrote the  Theory of Games . 
All these forces came together there , in Princeton .
Oppenheimer , who had built the bomb .
The machine was actually used mainly for doing bomb calculations .
And Julian Bigelow , who took Zworkykins place as the engineer , to actually figure out , using electronics , how you would build this thing . The whole gang of people who came to work on this , and women in front , who actually did most of the coding , were the first programmers .
These were the prototype geeks , the nerds .
They didnt fit in at the Institute .
This is a letter from the director , concerned about  -  -   especially unfair on the matter of sugar . 
You can read the text .
This is hackers getting in trouble for the first time .
These were not theoretical physicists .
They were real soldering - gun type guys , and they actually built this thing .
And we take it for granted now , that each of these machines has billions of transistors , doing billions of cycles per second without failing .
They were using vacuum tubes , very narrow , sloppy techniques to get actually binary behavior out of these radio vacuum tubes .
They actually used 6J6 , the common radio tube , because they found they were more reliable than the more expensive tubes .
And what they did at the Institute was publish every step of the way .
Reports were issued , so that this machine was cloned at 15 other places around the world .
And it really was . It was the original microprocessor .
All the computers now are copies of that machine .
The memory was in cathode ray tubes  -  -  a whole bunch of spots on the face of the tube  -  -  very , very sensitive to electromagnetic disturbances .
So , theres 40 of these tubes , like a V - 40 engine running the memory .
The input and the output was by teletype tape at first .
This is a wire drive , using bicycle wheels .
This is the archetype of the hard disk thats in your machine now .
Then they switched to a magnetic drum .
This is modifying IBM equipment , which is the origins of the whole data - processing industry , later at IBM .
And this is the beginning of computer graphics .
The  Graphg - Beam Turn On .  This next slide , thats the  -  -  as far as I know  -  -  the first digital bitmap display , 1954 .
So , Von Neumann was already off in a theoretical cloud , doing abstract sorts of studies of how you could build reliable machines out of unreliable components .
Those guys drinking all the tea with sugar in it were writing in their logbooks , trying to get this thing to work , with all these 2,600 vacuum tubes that failed half the time .
And thats what Ive been doing , this last six months , is going through the logs .
 Running time : two minutes . Input , output : 90 minutes . 
This includes a large amount of human error .
So they are always trying to figure out , whats machine error ? Whats human error ?
Whats code , whats hardware ?
Thats an engineer gazing at tube number 36 , trying to figure out why the memorys not in focus .
He had to focus the memory  -  -  seems OK .
So , he had to focus each tube just to get the memory up and running , let alone having , you know , software problems .
 No use , went home . 
 Impossible to follow the damn thing , wheres a directory ? 
So , already , theyre complaining about the manuals :  before closing down in disgust ...   The General Arithmetic : Operating Logs . 
Burning lots of midnight oil .
 MANIAC ,  which became the acronym for the machine , Mathematical and Numerical Integrator and Calculator ,  lost its memory . 
 MANIAC regained its memory , when the power went off .   Machine or human ? 
 Aha !  So , they figured out its a code problem .
 Found trouble in code , I hope . 
 Code error , machine not guilty . 
 Damn it , I can be just as stubborn as this thing . 
 And the dawn came .  So they ran all night .
Twenty - four hours a day , this thing was running , mainly running bomb calculations .
 Everything up to this point is wasted time .   Whats the use ? Good night . 
 Master control off . The hell with it . Way off . 
 Somethings wrong with the air conditioner  -  -  smell of burning V - belts in the air . 
 A short  -  -  do not turn the machine on . 
 IBM machine putting a tar - like substance on the cards . The tar is from the roof . 
So they really were working under tough conditions .
Here ,  A mouse has climbed into the blower behind the regulator rack , set blower to vibrating . Result : no more mouse . 
 Here lies mouse . Born : ? . Died : 4 : 50 a.m . , May 1953 . 
Theres an inside joke someone has penciled in :  Here lies Marston Mouse . 
If youre a mathematician , you get that , because Marston was a mathematician who objected to the computer being there .
 Picked a lightning bug off the drum .   Running at two kilocycles . 
Thats two thousand cycles per second  -  -   yes , Im chicken   -  -  so two kilocycles was slow speed .
The high speed was 16 kilocycles .
I dont know if you remember a Mac that was 16 Megahertz , thats slow speed .
 I have now duplicated both results .
How will I know which is right , assuming one result is correct ?
This now is the third different output .
I know when Im licked . 
 Weve duplicated errors before . 
 Machine run , fine . Code isnt . 
 Only happens when the machine is running . 
And sometimes things are okay .
 Machine a thing of beauty , and a joy forever .   Perfect running . 
 Parting thought : when theres bigger and better errors , well have them . 
So , nobody was supposed to know they were actually designing bombs .
Theyre designing hydrogen bombs . But someone in the logbook , late one night , finally drew a bomb .
So , that was the result . It was Mike , the first thermonuclear bomb , in 1952 .
That was designed on that machine , in the woods behind the Institute .
So Von Neumann invited a whole gang of weirdos from all over the world to work on all these problems .
Barricelli , he came to do what we now call , really , artificial life , trying to see if , in this artificial universe  -  -  he was a viral - geneticist , way , way , way ahead of his time .
Hes still ahead of some of the stuff thats being done now .
Trying to start an artificial genetic system running in the computer .
Began  -  -  his universe started March 3 , 53 .
So its almost exactly  -  -  its 50 years ago next Tuesday , I guess .
And he saw everything in terms of  -  -  he could read the binary code straight off the machine .
He had a wonderful rapport .
Other people couldnt get the machine running . It always worked for him .
Even errors were duplicated .
 Dr . Barricelli claims machine is wrong , code is right . 
So he designed this universe , and ran it .
When the bomb people went home , he was allowed in there .
He would run that thing all night long , running these things , if anybody remembers Stephen Wolfram , who reinvented this stuff .
And he published it . It wasnt locked up and disappeared .
It was published in the literature .
 If its that easy to create living organisms , why not create a few yourself ? 
So , he decided to give it a try , to start this artificial biology going in the machines .
And he found all these , sort of  -  -  it was like a naturalist coming in and looking at this tiny , 5,000 - byte universe , and seeing all these things happening that we see in the outside world , in biology .
This is some of the generations of his universe .
But theyre just going to stay numbers ; theyre not going to become organisms .
They have to have something .
You have a genotype and you have to have a phenotype .
They have to go out and do something . And he started doing that , started giving these little numerical organisms things they could play with  -  -  playing chess with other machines and so on .
And they did start to evolve .
And he went around the country after that .
Every time there was a new , fast machine , he started using it , and saw exactly whats happening now .
That the programs , instead of being turned off  -  -  when you quit the program , youd keep running and , basically , all the sorts of things like Windows is doing , running as a multi - cellular organism on many machines , he envisioned all that happening .
And he saw that evolution itself was an intelligent process .
It wasnt any sort of creator intelligence , but the thing itself was a giant parallel computation that would have some intelligence .
And he went out of his way to say that he was not saying this was lifelike , or a new kind of life .
It just was another version of the same thing happening .
And theres really no difference between what he was doing in the computer and what nature did billions of years ago .
And could you do it again now ?
So , when I went into these archives looking at this stuff , lo and behold , the archivist came up one day , saying ,  I think we found another box that had been thrown out . 
And it was his universe on punch cards .
So there it is , 50 years later , sitting there  -  -  sort of suspended animation .
Thats the instructions for running  -  -  this is actually the source code for one of those universes , with a note from the engineers saying theyre having some problems .
 There must be something about this code that you havent explained yet . 
And I think thats really the truth . We still dont understand how these very simple instructions can lead to increasing complexity .
Whats the dividing line between when that is lifelike and when it really is alive ?
These cards , now , thanks to me showing up , are being saved .
And the question is , should we run them or not ?
You know , could we get them running ?
Do you want to let it loose on the Internet ?
These machines would think they  -  -  these organisms , if they came back to life now  -  -  whether theyve died and gone to heaven , theres a universe .
My laptop is 10 thousand million times the size of the universe that they lived in when Barricelli quit the project .
He was thinking far ahead , to how this would really grow into a new kind of life .
And thats whats happening !
When Juan Enriquez told us about these 12 trillion bits being transferred back and forth , of all this genomics data going to the proteomics lab , thats what Barricelli imagined : that this digital code in these machines is actually starting to code  -  -  it already is coding from nucleic acids .
Weve been doing that since , you know , since we started PCR and synthesizing small strings of DNA .
And real soon , were actually going to be synthesizing the proteins , and , like Steve showed us , that just opens an entirely new world .
Its a world that Von Neumann himself envisioned .
This was published after he died : his sort of unfinished notes on self - reproducing machines , what it takes to get the machines sort of jump - started to where they begin to reproduce .
It took really three people : Barricelli had the concept of the code as a living thing ; Von Neumann saw how you could build the machines  -  -  that now , last count , four million of these Von Neumann machines is built every 24 hours ; and Julian Bigelow , who died 10 days ago  -  -  this is John Markoffs obituary for him  -  -  he was the important missing link , the engineer who came in and knew how to put those vacuum tubes together and make it work .
And all our computers have , inside them , the copies of the architecture that he had to just design one day , sort of on pencil and paper .
And we owe a tremendous credit to that .
And he explained , in a very generous way , the spirit that brought all these different people to the Institute for Advanced Study in the 40s to do this project , and make it freely available with no patents , no restrictions , no intellectual property disputes to the rest of the world .
Thats the last entry in the logbook when the machine was shut down , July 1958 .
And its Julian Bigelow who was running it until midnight when the machine was officially turned off .
And thats the end .
Thank you very much .
Don Norman : 3 ways good design makes you happy
In this talk from 2003 , design critic Don Norman turns his incisive eye toward beauty , fun , pleasure and emotion , as he looks at design that makes people happy . He names the three emotional cues that a well - designed product must hit to succeed .
The new me is beauty .
Yeah , people used to say ,  Normans OK , but if you followed what he said , everything would be usable but it would be ugly . 
Well , I didnt have that in mind , so ...
This is neat .
Thank you for setting up my display .
I mean , its just wonderful .
And I havent the slightest idea of what it does or what its good for , but I want it .
And thats my new life .
My new life is trying to understand what beauty is about , and  pretty ,  and  emotions . 
The new me is all about making things kind of neat and fun .
And so this is a Philippe Starck juicer , produced by Alessi .
Its just neat ; its fun . Its so much fun I have it in my house  -  -  but I have it in the entryway , I dont use it to make juice .
In fact , I bought the gold - plated special edition and it comes with a little slip of paper that says ,  Dont use this juicer to make juice . 
The acid will ruin the gold plating .
So actually , I took a carton of orange juice and I poured it in the glass to take this picture .
Beneath it is a wonderful knife .
Its a Global cutting knife made in Japan .
First of all , look at the shape  -  -  its just wonderful to look at .
Second of all , its really beautifully balanced : it holds well , it feels well .
And third of all , its so sharp , it just cuts .
Its a delight to use .
And so its got everything , right ?
Its beautiful and its functional .
And I can tell you stories about it , which makes it reflective , and so youll see I have a theory of emotion .
And those are the three components .
Hiroshi Ishii and his group at the MIT Media Lab took a ping - pong table and placed a projector above it , and on the ping - pong table they projected an image of water with fish swimming in it .
And as you play ping - pong , whenever the ball hits part of the table , the ripples spread out and the fish run away .
But of course , then the ball hits the other side , the ripples hit the  -  -  poor fish , they cant find any peace and quiet .
Is that a good way to play ping - pong ?
No . But is it fun ?
Yeah ! Yeah .
Or look at Google .
If you type in , oh say ,  emotion and design ,  you get 10 pages of results .
So Google just took their logo and they spread it out .
Instead of saying ,  You got 73,000 results .
This is one through 20 . Next ,  they just give you as many os as there are pages .
Its really simple and subtle .
I bet a lot of you have seen it and never noticed it .
Thats the subconscious mind that sort of notices it  -  -  it probably is kind of pleasant and you didnt know why .
And its just clever .
And of course , whats especially good is , if you type  design and emotion ,  the first response out of those 10 pages is my website .
Now , the weird thing is Google lies , because if I type  design and emotion ,  it says ,  You dont need the and . We do it anyway . 
So , OK .
So I type  design emotion  and my website wasnt first again .
It was third .
Oh well , different story .
There was this wonderful review in The New York Times about the MINI Cooper automobile .
It said ,  You know , this is a car that has lots of faults .
Buy it anyway .
Its so much fun to drive . 
And if you look at the inside of the car  -  -  I mean , I loved it , I wanted to see it , I rented it , this is me taking a picture while my son is driving  -  -  and the inside of the car , the whole design is fun .
Its round , its neat .
The controls work wonderfully .
So thats my new life ; its all about fun .
I really have the feeling that pleasant things work better , and that never made any sense to me until I finally figured out  -  -  look ...
Im going to put a plank on the ground .
So , imagine I have a plank about two feet wide and 30 feet long and Im going to walk on it , and you see I can walk on it without looking , I can go back and forth and I can jump up and down .
No problem .
Now Im going to put the plank 300 feet in the air  -  -  and Im not going to go near it , thank you .
Intense fear paralyzes you .
It actually affects the way the brain works .
So , Paul Saffo , before his talk said that he didnt really have it down until just a few days or hours before the talk , and that anxiety was really helpful in causing him to focus .
Thats what fear and anxiety does ; it causes you to be  -  -  whats called depth - first processing  -  -  to focus , not be distracted .
And I couldnt force myself across that .
Now some people can  -  -  circus workers , steel workers .
But it really changes the way you think .
And then , a psychologist , Alice Isen , did this wonderful experiment .
She brought students in to solve problems .
So , shed bring people into the room , and thered be a string hanging down here and a string hanging down here .
It was an empty room , except for a table with a bunch of crap on it  -  -  some papers and scissors and stuff .
And shed bring them in , and shed say ,  This is an IQ test and it determines how well you do in life .
Would you tie those two strings together ? 
So theyd take one string and theyd pull it over here and they couldnt reach the other string .
Still cant reach it .
And , basically , none of them could solve it .
You bring in a second group of people , and you say ,  Oh , before we start , I got this box of candy , and I dont eat candy .
Would you like the box of candy ? 
And turns out they liked it , and it made them happy  -  -  not very happy , but a little bit of happy .
And guess what  -  -  they solved the problem .
And it turns out that when youre anxious you squirt neural transmitters in the brain , which focuses you makes you depth - first .
And when youre happy  -  -  what we call positive valence  -  -  you squirt dopamine into the prefrontal lobes , which makes you a breadth - first problem solver : youre more susceptible to interruption ; you do out - of - the - box thinking .
Thats what brainstorming is about , right ?
With brainstorming we make you happy , we play games , and we say ,  No criticism ,  and you get all these weird , neat ideas .
But in fact , if thats how you always were youd never get any work done because youd be working along and say ,  Oh , I got a new way of doing it . 
So to get work done , youve got to set a deadline , right ?
Youve got be anxious .
The brain works differently if youre happy . Things work better because youre more creative .
You get a little problem , you say ,  Ah , Ill figure it out . 
No big deal .
Theres something I call the visceral level of processing , and there will be visceral - level design .
Biology  -  -  we have co - adapted through biology to like bright colors .
Thats especially good that mammals and primates like fruits and bright plants , because you eat the fruit and you thereby spread the seed .
Theres an amazing amount of stuff thats built into the brain .
We dislike bitter tastes , we dislike loud sounds , we dislike hot temperatures , cold temperatures .
We dislike scolding voices . We dislike frowning faces ; we like symmetrical faces , etc . , etc .
So thats the visceral level .
In design , you can express visceral in lots of ways , like the choice of type fonts and the red for hot , exciting .
Or the 1963 Jaguar : Its actually a crummy car , falls apart all the time , but the owners love it .
And its beautiful  -  -  its in the Museum of Modern Art .
A water bottle : You buy it because of the bottle , not because of the water .
And when people are finished , they dont throw it away .
They keep it for  -  -  you know , its like the old wine bottles , you keep it for decoration or maybe fill it with water again , which proves its not the water .
Its all about the visceral experience .
The middle level of processing is the behavioral level and thats actually where most of our stuff gets done .
Visceral is subconscious , youre unaware of it .
Behavioral is subconscious , youre unaware of it .
Almost everything we do is subconscious .
Im walking around the stage  -  -  Im not attending to the control of my legs .
Im doing a lot ; most of my talk is subconscious ; it has been rehearsed and thought about a lot .
Most of what we do is subconscious .
Automatic behavior  -  -  skilled behavior  -  -  is subconscious , controlled by the behavioral side .
And behavioral design is all about feeling in control , which includes usability , understanding  -  -  but also the feel and heft .
Thats why the Global knives are so neat .
Theyre so nicely balanced , so sharp , that you really feel youre in control of the cutting .
Or , just driving a high - performance sports car over a demanding curb  -  -  again , feeling that you are in complete control of the environment .
Or the sensual feeling .
This is a Kohler shower , a waterfall shower , and actually , all those knobs beneath are also showerheads .
It will squirt you all around and you can stay in that shower for hours  -  -  and not waste water , by the way , because it recirculates the same dirty water .
Or this  -  -  this is a really neat teapot I found at high tea at The Four Seasons Hotel in Chicago .
Its a Ronnefeldt tilting teapot .
Thats kind of what the teapot looks like but the way you use it is you lay it on its back , and you put tea in , and then you fill it with water .
The water then seeps over the tea .
And the tea is sitting in this stuff to the right  -  -  the tea is to the right of this line .
Theres a little ledge inside , so the tea is sitting there and the water is filling it up like that .
And when the tea is ready , or almost ready , you tilt it .
And that means the tea is partially covered while it completes the brewing .
And when its finished , you put it vertically , and now the tea is  -  -  you remember  -  -  above this line and the water only comes to here  -  -  and so it keeps the tea out .
On top of that , it communicates , which is what emotion does .
Emotion is all about acting ; emotion is really about acting .
Its being safe in the world .
Cognition is about understanding the world , emotion is about interpreting it  -  -  saying good , bad , safe , dangerous , and getting us ready to act , which is why the muscles tense or relax .
And thats why we can tell the emotion of somebody else  -  -  because their muscles are acting , subconsciously , except that weve evolved to make the facial muscles really rich with emotion .
Well , this has emotions if you like , because it signals the waiter that ,  Hey , Im finished . See  -  -  upright . 
And the waiter can come by and say ,  Would you like more water ? 
Its kind of neat . What a wonderful design .
And the third level is reflective , which is , if you like the superego , its a little part of the brain that has no control over what you do , no control over the  -  -  doesnt see the senses , doesnt control the muscles .
It looks over whats going on .
Its that little voice in your head thats watching and saying ,  Thats good . Thats bad . 
Or ,  Why are you doing that ? I dont understand . 
Its that little voice in your head thats the seat of consciousness .
Heres a great reflective product .
Owners of the Hummer have said ,  You know Ive owned many cars in my life  -  -  all sorts of exotic cars , but never have I had a car that attracted so much attention . 
Its about attention . Its about their image , not about the car .
If you want a more positive model  -  -  this is the GM car .
And the reason you might buy it now is because you care about the environment .
And youll buy it to protect the environment , even though the first few cars are going to be really expensive and not perfected .
But thats reflective design as well .
Or an expensive watch , so you can impress people  -  -   Oh gee , I didnt know you had that watch . 
As opposed to this one , which is a pure behavioral watch , which probably keeps better time than the $ 13,000 watch I just showed you .
But its ugly .
This is a clear Don Norman watch .
And whats neat is sometimes you pit one emotion against the other , the visceral fear of falling against the reflective state saying ,  Its OK . Its OK . Its safe . Its safe . 
If that amusement park were rusty and falling apart , youd never go on the ride .
So , its pitting one against the other .
The other neat thing ...
So Jake Cress is this furniture maker , and he makes this unbelievable set of furniture .
And this is his chair with claw , and the poor little chair has lost its ball and its trying to get it back before anybody notices .
And whats so neat about it is how you accept that story .
And thats whats nice about emotion .
So thats the new me .
Im only saying positive things from now on .
Renny Gleeson : Our antisocial phone tricks
In this funny 3 - minute talk , social strategist Renny Gleeson breaks down our always - on social world  -  -  where the experience were having right now is less interesting than what well tweet about it later .
What I wanted to talk to you about today is two things : one , the rise of a culture of availability ; and two , a request .
So were seeing a rise of this availability being driven by mobile device proliferation , globally , across all social strata .
Were seeing , along with that proliferation of mobile devices , an expectation of availability .
And , with that , comes the third point , which is obligation  -  -  and an obligation to that availability .
And the problem is , were still working through , from a societal standpoint , how we allow people to be available .
Theres a significant delta , in fact , between what were willing to accept .
Apologies to Hans Rosling  -  -  he said anything thats not using real stats is a lie  -  -  but the big delta there is how we deal with this from a public standpoint .
So weve developed certain tactics and strategies to cover up .
This first ones called  the lean . 
And if youve ever been in a meeting where you play sort of meeting  chicken ,  youre sitting there , looking at the person , waiting for them to look away , and then quickly checking the device .
Although you can see the gentleman up on the right is busting him .
 The stretch . 
OK , the gentleman on the left is saying ,  Screw you , Im going to check my device . 
But the guy , here , on the right , hes doing the stretch .
to get that device just below the tabletop .
Or , my favorite , the  Love you ; mean it . 
Nothing says  I love you  like  Let me find somebody else I give a damn about . 
Or , this one , coming to us from India .
You can find this on YouTube , the gentleman whos recumbent on a motorcycle while text messaging .
Or what we call the  sweet gravy , stop me before I kill again ! 
That is actually the device .
What this is doing is , we find a  -  -  a direct collision  -  -  we find a direct collision between availability  -  -  and whats possible through availability  -  -  and a fundamental human need  -  -  which weve been hearing about a lot , actually  -  -  the need to create shared narratives .
Were very good at creating personal narratives , but its the shared narratives that make us a culture .
And when youre standing with someone , and youre on your mobile device , effectively what youre saying to them is ,  You are not as important as , literally , almost anything that could come to me through this device . 
Look around you .
There might be somebody on one right now , participating in multi - dimensional engagement .
Our reality right now is less interesting than the story were going to tell about it later .
This one I love .
This poor kid , clearly a prop  -  -  dont get me wrong , a willing prop  -  -  but the kiss thats being documented kind of looks like it sucks .
This is the sound of one hand clapping .
So , as we lose the context of our identity , it becomes incredibly important that what you share becomes the context of shared narrative , becomes the context in which we live .
The stories that we tell  -  -  what we push out  -  -  becomes who we are .
People arent simply projecting identity , theyre creating it .
And so thats the request I have for everybody in this room .
We are creating the technology that is going to create the new shared experience , which will create the new world .
And so my request is , please , lets make technologies that make people more human , and not less .
Thank you .
Keith Chen : Could your language affect your ability to save money ?
What can economists learn from linguists ? Behavioral economist Keith Chen introduces a fascinating pattern from his research : that languages without a concept for the future  -  -   It rain tomorrow ,  instead of  It will rain tomorrow   -  -  correlate strongly with high savings rates .
The global economic financial crisis has reignited public interest in something thats actually one of the oldest questions in economics , dating back to at least before Adam Smith .
And that is , why is it that countries with seemingly similar economies and institutions can display radically different savings behavior ?
Now , many brilliant economists have spent their entire lives working on this question , and as a field weve made a tremendous amount of headway and we understand a lot about this .
What Im here to talk with you about today is an intriguing new hypothesis and some surprisingly powerful new findings that Ive been working on about the link between the structure of the language you speak and how you find yourself with the propensity to save .
Let me tell you a little bit about savings rates , a little bit about language , and then Ill draw that connection .
Lets start by thinking about the member countries of the OECD , or the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development .
OECD countries , by and large , you should think about these as the richest , most industrialized countries in the world .
And by joining the OECD , they were affirming a common commitment to democracy , open markets and free trade .
Despite all of these similarities , we see huge differences in savings behavior .
So all the way over on the left of this graph , what you see is many OECD countries saving over a quarter of their GDP every year , and some OECD countries saving over a third of their GDP per year .
Holding down the right flank of the OECD , all the way on the other side , is Greece .
And what you can see is that over the last 25 years , Greece has barely managed to save more than 10 percent of their GDP .
It should be noted , of course , that the United States and the U.K . are the next in line .
Now that we see these huge differences in savings rates , how is it possible that language might have something to do with these differences ?
Let me tell you a little bit about how languages fundamentally differ .
Linguists and cognitive scientists have been exploring this question for many years now .
And then Ill draw the connection between these two behaviors .
Many of you have probably already noticed that Im Chinese .
I grew up in the Midwest of the United States .
And something I realized quite early on was that the Chinese language forced me to speak about and  -  -  in fact , more fundamentally than that  -  -  ever so slightly forced me to think about family in very different ways .
Now , how might that be ? Let me give you an example .
Suppose I were talking with you and I was introducing you to my uncle .
You understood exactly what I just said in English .
If we were speaking Mandarin Chinese with each other , though , I wouldnt have that luxury .
I wouldnt have been able to convey so little information .
What my language would have forced me to do , instead of just telling you ,  This is my uncle ,  is to tell you a tremendous amount of additional information .
My language would force me to tell you whether or not this was an uncle on my mothers side or my fathers side , whether this was an uncle by marriage or by birth , and if this man was my fathers brother , whether he was older than or younger than my father .
All of this information is obligatory . Chinese doesnt let me ignore it .
And in fact , if I want to speak correctly , Chinese forces me to constantly think about it .
Now , that fascinated me endlessly as a child , but what fascinates me even more today as an economist is that some of these same differences carry through to how languages speak about time .
So for example , if Im speaking in English , I have to speak grammatically differently if Im talking about past rain ,  It rained yesterday ,  current rain ,  It is raining now ,  or future rain ,  It will rain tomorrow . 
Notice that English requires a lot more information with respect to the timing of events .
Why ? Because I have to consider that and I have to modify what Im saying to say ,  It will rain ,  or  Its going to rain . 
Its simply not permissible in English to say ,  It rain tomorrow . 
In contrast to that , thats almost exactly what you would say in Chinese .
A Chinese speaker can basically say something that sounds very strange to an English speakers ears .
They can say ,  Yesterday it rain ,   Now it rain ,   Tomorrow it rain . 
In some deep sense , Chinese doesnt divide up the time spectrum in the same way that English forces us to constantly do in order to speak correctly .
Is this difference in languages only between very , very distantly related languages , like English and Chinese ?
Actually , no .
So many of you know , in this room , that English is a Germanic language .
What you may not have realized is that English is actually an outlier .
It is the only Germanic language that requires this .
For example , most other Germanic language speakers feel completely comfortable talking about rain tomorrow by saying ,  Morgen regnet es ,  quite literally to an English ear ,  It rain tomorrow . 
This led me , as a behavioral economist , to an intriguing hypothesis .
Could how you speak about time , could how your language forces you to think about time , affect your propensity to behave across time ?
You speak English , a futured language .
And what that means is that every time you discuss the future , or any kind of a future event , grammatically youre forced to cleave that from the present and treat it as if its something viscerally different .
Now suppose that that visceral difference makes you subtly dissociate the future from the present every time you speak .
If thats true and it makes the future feel like something more distant and more different from the present , thats going to make it harder to save .
If , on the other hand , you speak a futureless language , the present and the future , you speak about them identically .
If that subtly nudges you to feel about them identically , thats going to make it easier to save .
Now this is a fanciful theory .
Im a professor , I get paid to have fanciful theories .
But how would you actually go about testing such a theory ?
Well , what I did with that was to access the linguistics literature .
And interestingly enough , there are pockets of futureless language speakers situated all over the world .
This is a pocket of futureless language speakers in Northern Europe .
Interestingly enough , when you start to crank the data , these pockets of futureless language speakers all around the world turn out to be , by and large , some of the worlds best savers .
Just to give you a hint of that , lets look back at that OECD graph that we were talking about .
What you see is that these bars are systematically taller and systematically shifted to the left compared to these bars which are the members of the OECD that speak futured languages .
What is the average difference here ?
Five percentage points of your GDP saved per year .
Over 25 years that has huge long - run effects on the wealth of your nation .
Now while these findings are suggestive , countries can be different in so many different ways that its very , very difficult sometimes to account for all of these possible differences .
What Im going to show you , though , is something that Ive been engaging in for a year , which is trying to gather all of the largest datasets that we have access to as economists , and Im going to try and strip away all of those possible differences , hoping to get this relationship to break .
And just in summary , no matter how far I push this , I cant get it to break .
Let me show you how far you can do that .
One way to imagine that is I gather large datasets from around the world .
So for example , there is the Survey of Health ,  Aging  and Retirement in Europe .
From this dataset you actually learn that retired European families are extremely patient with survey takers .
So imagine that youre a retired household in Belgium and someone comes to your front door .
 Excuse me , would you mind if I peruse your stock portfolio ?
Do you happen to know how much your house is worth ? Do you mind telling me ?
Would you happen to have a hallway thats more than 10 meters long ?
If you do , would you mind if I timed how long it took you to walk down that hallway ?
Would you mind squeezing as hard as you can , in your dominant hand , this device so I can measure your grip strength ?
How about blowing into this tube so I can measure your lung capacity ? 
The survey takes over a day .
Combine that with a Demographic and Health Survey collected by USAID in developing countries in Africa , for example , which that survey actually can go so far as to directly measure the HIV status of families living in , for example , rural Nigeria .
Combine that with a world value survey , which measures the political opinions and , fortunately for me , the savings behaviors of millions of families in hundreds of countries around the world .
Take all of that data , combine it , and this map is what you get .
What you find is nine countries around the world that have significant native populations which speak both futureless and futured languages .
And what Im going to do is form statistical matched pairs between families that are nearly identical on every dimension that I can measure , and then Im going to explore whether or not the link between language and savings holds even after controlling for all of these levels .
What are the characteristics we can control for ?
Well Im going to match families on country of birth and residence , the demographics  -  -  what sex , their age  -  -  their income level within their own country , their educational achievement , a lot about their family structure .
It turns out there are six different ways to be married in Europe .
And most granularly , I break them down by religion where there are 72 categories of religions in the world  -  -  so an extreme level of granularity .
There are 1.4 billion different ways that a family can find itself .
Now effectively everything Im going to tell you from now on is only comparing these basically nearly identical families .
Its getting as close as possible to the thought experiment of finding two families both of whom live in Brussels who are identical on every single one of these dimensions , but one of whom speaks Flemish and one of whom speaks French ; or two families that live in a rural district in Nigeria , one of whom speaks Hausa and one of whom speaks Igbo .
Now even after all of this granular level of control , do futureless language speakers seem to save more ?
Yes , futureless language speakers , even after this level of control , are 30 percent more likely to report having saved in any given year .
Does this have cumulative effects ?
Yes , by the time they retire , futureless language speakers , holding constant their income , are going to retire with 25 percent more in savings .
Can we push this data even further ?
Yes , because I just told you , we actually collect a lot of health data as economists .
Now how can we think about health behaviors to think about savings ?
Well , think about smoking , for example .
Smoking is in some deep sense negative savings .
If savings is current pain in exchange for future pleasure , smoking is just the opposite .
Its current pleasure in exchange for future pain .
What we should expect then is the opposite effect .
And thats exactly what we find .
Futureless language speakers are 20 to 24 percent less likely to be smoking at any given point in time compared to identical families , and theyre going to be 13 to 17 percent less likely to be obese by the time they retire , and theyre going to report being 21 percent more likely to have used a condom in their last sexual encounter .
I could go on and on with the list of differences that you can find .
Its almost impossible not to find a savings behavior for which this strong effect isnt present .
My linguistics and economics colleagues at Yale and I are just starting to do this work and really explore and understand the ways that these subtle nudges cause us to think more or less about the future every single time we speak .
Ultimately , the goal , once we understand how these subtle effects can change our decision making , we want to be able to provide people tools so that they can consciously make themselves better savers and more conscious investors in their own future .
Thank you very much .
Ken Robinson : Bring on the learning revolution !
In this poignant , funny follow - up to his fabled 2006 talk , Sir Ken Robinson makes the case for a radical shift from standardized schools to personalized learning  -  -  creating conditions where kids natural talents can flourish .
I was here four years ago , and I remember , at the time , that the talks werent put online .
I think they were given to TEDsters in a box , a box set of DVDs , which they put on their shelves , where they are now .
And actually , Chris called me a week after Id given my talk and he said ,  Were going to start putting them online .
Can we put yours online ?  And I said ,  Sure . 
And four years later , as I said , its been seen by four ...
Well , its been downloaded four million times .
So I suppose you could multiply that by 20 or something to get the number of people whove seen it .
And , as Chris says , there is a hunger for videos of me .
... dont you feel ?
So , this whole event has been an elaborate build - up to me doing another one for you , so here it is .
Al Gore spoke at the TED conference I spoke at four years ago and talked about the climate crisis .
And I referenced that at the end of my last talk .
So I want to pick up from there because I only had 18 minutes , frankly .
So , as I was saying ...
You see , hes right .
I mean , there is a major climate crisis , obviously , and I think if people dont believe it , they should get out more .
But I believe theres a second climate crisis , which is as severe , which has the same origins , and that we have to deal with with the same urgency .
And I mean by this  -  -  and you may say , by the way ,  Look , Im good .
I have one climate crisis ; I dont really need the second one . 
But this is a crisis of , not natural resources  -  -  though I believe thats true  -  -  but a crisis of human resources .
I believe fundamentally , as many speakers have said during the past few days , that we make very poor use of our talents .
Very many people go through their whole lives having no real sense of what their talents may be , or if they have any to speak of .
I meet all kinds of people who dont think theyre really good at anything .
Actually , I kind of divide the world into two groups now .
Jeremy Bentham , the great utilitarian philosopher , once spiked this argument .
He said ,  There are two types of people in this world : those who divide the world into two types and those who do not . 
Well , I do .
I meet all kinds of people who dont enjoy what they do .
They simply go through their lives getting on with it .
They get no great pleasure from what they do .
They endure it rather than enjoy it and wait for the weekend .
But I also meet people who love what they do and couldnt imagine doing anything else .
If you said to them ,  Dont do this anymore ,  theyd wonder what you were talking about .
Because it isnt what they do , its who they are . They say ,  But this is me , you know .
It would be foolish for me to abandon this , because it speaks to my most authentic self . 
And its not true of enough people .
its still true of a minority of people .
I think there are many possible explanations for it .
And high among them is education , because education , in a way , dislocates very many people from their natural talents .
And human resources are like natural resources ; theyre often buried deep .
You have to go looking for them , theyre not just lying around on the surface .
You have to create the circumstances where they show themselves .
And you might imagine education would be the way that happens , but too often its not .
Every education system in the world is being reformed at the moment and its not enough .
Reform is no use anymore , because thats simply improving a broken model .
What we need  -  -  and the words been used many times during the course of the past few days  -  -  is not evolution , but a revolution in education .
This has to be transformed into something else .
One of the real challenges is to innovate fundamentally in education .
Innovation is hard because it means doing something that people dont find very easy , for the most part .
It means challenging what we take for granted , things that we think are obvious .
The great problem for reform or transformation is the tyranny of common sense ; things that people think ,  Well , it cant be done any other way because thats the way its done . 
I came across a great quote recently from Abraham Lincoln , who I thought youd be pleased to have quoted at this point .
He said this in December 1862 to the second annual meeting of Congress .
I ought to explain that I have no idea what was happening at the time .
We dont teach American history in Britain .
We suppress it . You know , this is our policy .
So , no doubt , something fascinating was happening in December 1862 , which the Americans among us will be aware of .
But he said this :  The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present .
The occasion is piled high with difficulty , and we must rise with the occasion . 
I love that .
Not rise to it , rise with it .
 As our case is new , so we must think anew and act anew .
We must disenthrall ourselves , and then we shall save our country . 
I love that word ,  disenthrall . 
You know what it means ?
That there are ideas that all of us are enthralled to , which we simply take for granted as the natural order of things , the way things are .
And many of our ideas have been formed , not to meet the circumstances of this century , but to cope with the circumstances of previous centuries .
But our minds are still hypnotized by them , and we have to disenthrall ourselves of some of them .
Now , doing this is easier said than done .
Its very hard to know , by the way , what it is you take for granted .
And the reason is that you take it for granted .
So let me ask you something you may take for granted .
How many of you here are over the age of 25 ?
Thats not what I think you take for granted , Im sure youre familiar with that already .
Are there any people here under the age of 25 ?
Great . Now , those over 25 , could you put your hands up if youre wearing your wristwatch ?
Ask a room full of teenagers the same thing .
Teenagers do not wear wristwatches .
I dont mean they cant or theyre not allowed to , they just often choose not to .
And the reason is , you see , that we were brought up in a pre - digital culture , those of us over 25 .
And so for us , if you want to know the time you have to wear something to tell it .
Kids now live in a world which is digitized , and the time , for them , is everywhere .
They see no reason to do this .
And by the way , you dont need to do it either ; its just that youve always done it and you carry on doing it .
My daughter never wears a watch , my daughter Kate , whos 20 .
She doesnt see the point .
As she says ,  Its a single function device . 
 Like , how lame is that ? 
And I say ,  No , no , it tells the date as well . 
 It has multiple functions . 
But , you see , there are things were enthralled to in education .
Let me give you a couple of examples .
One of them is the idea of linearity : that it starts here and you go through a track and if you do everything right , you will end up set for the rest of your life .
Everybody whos spoken at TED has told us implicitly , or sometimes explicitly , a different story : that life is not linear ; its organic .
We create our lives symbiotically as we explore our talents in relation to the circumstances they help to create for us .
But , you know , we have become obsessed with this linear narrative .
And probably the pinnacle for education is getting you to college .
I think we are obsessed with getting people to college .
Certain sorts of college .
I dont mean you shouldnt go to college , but not everybody needs to go and not everybody needs to go now .
Maybe they go later , not right away .
And I was up in San Francisco a while ago doing a book signing .
There was this guy buying a book , he was in his 30s .
And I said ,  What do you do ? 
And he said ,  Im a fireman . 
And I said ,  How long have you been a fireman ? 
He said ,  Always . Ive always been a fireman . 
And I said ,  Well , when did you decide ? 
He said ,  As a kid .  He said ,  Actually , it was a problem for me at school , because at school , everybody wanted to be a fireman . 
He said ,  But I wanted to be a fireman . 
And he said ,  When I got to the senior year of school , my teachers didnt take it seriously .
This one teacher didnt take it seriously .
He said I was throwing my life away if thats all I chose to do with it ; that I should go to college , I should become a professional person , that I had great potential and I was wasting my talent to do that . 
And he said ,  It was humiliating because he said it in front of the whole class and I really felt dreadful .
But its what I wanted , and as soon as I left school , I applied to the fire service and I was accepted . 
And he said ,  You know , I was thinking about that guy recently , just a few minutes ago when you were speaking , about this teacher ,  he said ,  because six months ago , I saved his life . 
He said ,  He was in a car wreck , and I pulled him out , gave him CPR , and I saved his wifes life as well . 
He said ,  I think he thinks better of me now . 
You know , to me , human communities depend upon a diversity of talent , not a singular conception of ability .
And at the heart of our challenges  -  -  At the heart of the challenge is to reconstitute our sense of ability and of intelligence .
This linearity thing is a problem .
When I arrived in L.A .
about nine years ago , I came across a policy statement  -  -  very well - intentioned  -  -  which said ,  College begins in kindergarten . 
No , it doesnt .
It doesnt .
If we had time , I could go into this , but we dont .
Kindergarten begins in kindergarten .
A friend of mine once said ,  You know , a three year - old is not half a six year - old . 
Theyre three .
But as we just heard in this last session , theres such competition now to get into kindergarten  -  -  to get to the right kindergarten  -  -  that people are being interviewed for it at three .
Kids sitting in front of unimpressed panels , you know , with their resumes , flipping through and saying ,  Well , this is it ? 
 Youve been around for 36 months , and this is it ? 
 Youve achieved nothing  -  -  commit .
Spent the first six months breastfeeding , the way I can see it . 
See , its outrageous as a conception , but it  unclear  .
The other big issue is conformity .
We have built our education systems on the model of fast food .
This is something Jamie Oliver talked about the other day .
You know there are two models of quality assurance in catering .
One is fast food , where everything is standardized .
The other are things like Zagat and Michelin restaurants , where everything is not standardized , theyre customized to local circumstances .
And we have sold ourselves into a fast food model of education , and its impoverishing our spirit and our energies as much as fast food is depleting our physical bodies .
I think we have to recognize a couple of things here .
One is that human talent is tremendously diverse .
People have very different aptitudes .
I worked out recently that I was given a guitar as a kid at about the same time that Eric Clapton got his first guitar .
You know , it worked out for Eric , thats all Im saying .
In a way , it did not for me .
I could not get this thing to work no matter how often or how hard I blew into it .
It just wouldnt work .
But its not only about that .
Its about passion .
Often , people are good at things they dont really care for .
Its about passion , and what excites our spirit and our energy .
And if youre doing the thing that you love to do , that youre good at , time takes a different course entirely .
My wifes just finished writing a novel , and I think its a great book , but she disappears for hours on end .
You know this , if youre doing something you love , an hour feels like five minutes .
If youre doing something that doesnt resonate with your spirit , five minutes feels like an hour .
And the reason so many people are opting out of education is because it doesnt feed their spirit , it doesnt feed their energy or their passion .
So I think we have to change metaphors .
We have to go from what is essentially an industrial model of education , a manufacturing model , which is based on linearity and conformity and batching people .
We have to move to a model that is based more on principles of agriculture .
We have to recognize that human flourishing is not a mechanical process ; its an organic process .
And you can not predict the outcome of human development .
All you can do , like a farmer , is create the conditions under which they will begin to flourish .
So when we look at reforming education and transforming it , it isnt like cloning a system .
There are great ones , like KIPPs ; its a great system .
There are many great models .
Its about customizing to your circumstances and personalizing education to the people youre actually teaching .
And doing that , I think , is the answer to the future because its not about scaling a new solution ; its about creating a movement in education in which people develop their own solutions , but with external support based on a personalized curriculum .
Now in this room , there are people who represent extraordinary resources in business , in multimedia , in the Internet .
These technologies , combined with the extraordinary talents of teachers , provide an opportunity to revolutionize education .
And I urge you to get involved in it because its vital , not just to ourselves , but to the future of our children .
But we have to change from the industrial model to an agricultural model , where each school can be flourishing tomorrow .
Thats where children experience life .
Or at home , if thats where they choose to be educated with their families or their friends .
Theres been a lot of talk about dreams over the course of this few days .
And I wanted to just very quickly ...
I was very struck by Natalie Merchants songs last night , recovering old poems .
I wanted to read you a quick , very short poem from W.B . Yeats , who some of you may know .
He wrote this to his love , Maud Gonne , and he was bewailing the fact that he couldnt really give her what he thought she wanted from him .
And he says ,  Ive got something else , but it may not be for you . 
He says this :  Had I the heavens embroidered cloths , Enwrought with gold and silver light , The blue and the dim and the dark cloths Of night and light and the half - light , I would spread the cloths under your feet : But I , being poor , have only my dreams ; I have spread my dreams under your feet ; Tread softly because you tread on my dreams . 
And every day , everywhere , our children spread their dreams beneath our feet .
And we should tread softly .
Thank you .
Thank you very much .
Elizabeth Murchison : Fighting a contagious cancer
What is killing the Tasmanian devil ? A virulent cancer is infecting them by the thousands  -  -  and unlike most cancers , its contagious . Researcher Elizabeth Murchison tells us how shes fighting to save the Taz , and what shes learning about all cancers from this unusual strain . Contains disturbing images of facial cancer .
Everyones familiar with cancer , but we dont normally think of cancer as being a contagious disease .
The Tasmanian devil has shown us that , not only can cancer be a contagious disease , but it can also threaten an entire species with extinction .
So first of all , what is a Tasmanian devil ?
Many of you might be familiar with Taz , the cartoon character , the one that spins around and around and around .
But not many people know that there actually is a real animal called the Tasmanian devil , and its the worlds largest carnivorous marsupial .
A marsupial is a mammal with a pouch like a kangaroo .
The Tasmanian devil got its name from the terrifying nocturnal scream that it makes .
The Tasmanian devil is predominantly a scavenger , and it uses its powerful jaws and its sharp teeth to chomp on the bones of rotting dead animals .
 The  Tasmanian devil is found only on the island of Tasmania , which is that small island just to the south of the mainland of Australia .
And despite their ferocious appearance , Tasmanian devils are actually quite adorable little animals .
In fact , growing up in Tasmania , it always was incredibly exciting when we got a chance to see a Tasmanian devil in the wild .
But the Tasmanian devil population has been undergoing a really extremely fast decline .
And in fact , theres concern that the species could go extinct in the wild within 20 to 30 years .
And the reason for that is the emergence of a new disease , a contagious cancer .
The story begins in 1996 when a wildlife photographer took this photograph here of a Tasmanian devil with a large tumor on its face .
At the time , this was thought to be a one - off .
Animals , just like humans , sometimes get strange tumors .
However , we now believe that this is the first sighting of a new disease , which is now an epidemic spreading through Tasmania .
The disease was first sighted in the northeast of Tasmania in 1996 and has spread across Tasmania like a huge wave .
Now theres only a small part of the population , which remains unaffected .
This disease appears first as tumors , usually on the face or inside the mouth of affected Tasmanian devils .
These tumors inevitably grow into larger tumors , such as these ones here .
And the next image Im going to show is quite gruesome .
But inevitably , these tumors progress towards being enormous , ulcerating tumors like this one here .
This one in particular sticks in my mind , because this is the first case of this disease that I saw myself .
And I remember the horror of seeing this little female devil with this huge ulcerating , foul - smelling tumor inside her mouth that had actually cracked off her entire lower jaw .
She hadnt eaten for days .
Her guts were swimming with parasitic worms .
Her body was riddled with secondary tumors .
And yet , she was feeding three little baby Tasmanian devils in her pouch .
Of course , they died along with the mother .
They were too young to survive without their mother .
In fact , in the area where she comes from , more than 90 percent of the Tasmanian devil population has already died of this disease .
Scientists around the world were intrigued by this cancer , this infectious cancer , that was spreading through the Tasmanian devil population .
And our minds immediately turned to cervical cancer in women , which is spread by a virus , and to the AIDS epidemic , which is associated with a number of different types of cancer .
All the evidence suggested that this devil cancer was spread by a virus .
However , we now know  -  -  and Ill tell you right now  -  -  that we know that this cancer is not spread by a virus .
In fact , the infectious agent of disease in this cancer is something altogether more sinister , and something that we hadnt really thought of before .
But in order for me to explain what that is , I need to spend just a couple of minutes talking more about cancer itself .
Cancer is a disease that affects millions of people around the world every year .
One in three people in this room will develop cancer at some stage in their lives .
I myself had a tumor removed from my large intestine when I was only 14 .
Cancer occurs when a single cell in your body acquires a set of random mutations in important genes that cause that cell to start to produce more and more and more copies of itself .
Paradoxically , once established , natural selection actually favors the continued growth of cancer .
Natural selection is survival of the fittest .
And when you have a population of fast - dividing cancer cells , if one of them acquires new mutations , which allow them to grow more quickly , acquire nutrients more successfully , invade the body , theyll be selected for by evolution .
Thats why cancer is such a difficult disease to treat .
It evolves .
Throw a drug at it , and resistant cells will grow back .
An amazing fact is that , given the right environment and the right nutrients , a cancer cell has the potential to go on growing forever .
However cancer is constrained by living inside our bodies , and its continued growth , its spreading through our bodies and eating away at our tissues , leads to the death of the cancer patient and also to the death of the cancer itself .
So cancer could be thought of as a strange , short - lived , self - destructive life form  -  -  an evolutionary dead end .
But that is where the Tasmanian devil cancer has acquired an absolutely amazing evolutionary adaptation .
And the answer came from studying the Tasmanian devil cancers DNA .
This was work from many people , but Im going to explain it through a confirmatory experiment that I did a few years ago .
The next slide is going to be gruesome .
This is Jonas .
Hes a Tasmanian devil that we found with a large tumor on his face .
And being a geneticist , Im always interested to look at DNA and mutations .
So I took this opportunity to collect some samples from Jonas tumor and also some samples from other parts of his body .
I took these back to the lab .
I extracted DNA from them .
And when I looked at the sequence of the DNA , and compared the sequence of Jonas tumor to that of the rest of his body , I discovered that they had a completely different genetic profile .
In fact , Jonas and his tumor were as different from each other as you and the person sitting next to you .
What this told us was that Jonas tumor did not arise from cells of his own body .
In fact , more genetic profiling told us that this tumor in Jonas actually probably first arose from the cells of a female Tasmanian devil  -  -  and Jonas was clearly a male .
So how come a tumor that arose from the cells of another individual is growing on Jonas face ?
Well the next breakthrough came from studying hundreds of Tasmanian devil cancers from all around Tasmania .
We found that all of these cancers shared the same DNA .
Think about that for a minute .
That means that all of these cancers actually are the same cancer that arose once from one individual devil , that have broken free of that first devils body and spread through the entire Tasmanian devil population .
But how can a cancer spread in a population ?
Well the final piece of the puzzle came when we remember how devils behave when they meet each other in the wild .
They tend to bite each other , often quite ferociously and usually on the face .
We think that cancer cells actually come off the tumor , get into the saliva .
When the devil bites another devil , it actually physically implants living cancer cells into the next devil , so the tumor continues to grow .
So this Tasmanian devil cancer is perhaps the ultimate cancer .
Its not constrained by living within the body that gave rise to it .
It spreads through the population , has mutations that allow it to evade the immune system , and its the only cancer that we know of thats threatening an entire species with extinction .
But if this can happen in Tasmanian devils , why hasnt it happened in other animals or even humans ?
Well the answer is , it has .
This is Kimbo .
Hes a dog that belongs to a family in Mombasa in Kenya .
Last year , his owner noticed some blood trickling from his genital region .
She took him to the vet and the vet discovered something quite disgusting .
And if youre squeamish , please look away now .
He discovered this , a huge bleeding tumor at the base of Kimbos penis .
The vet diagnosed this as transmissible venereal tumor , a sexually transmitted cancer that affects dogs .
And just as the Tasmanian devil cancer is contagious through the spread of living cancer cells , so is this dog cancer .
But this dog cancer is quite remarkable , because it spread all around the world .
And in fact , these same cells that are affecting Kimbo here are also found affecting dogs in New York City , in mountain villages in the Himalayas and in Outback Australia .
We also believe this cancer might be very old .
In fact , genetic profiling tells that it may be tens of thousands of years old , which means that this cancer may have first arisen from the cells of a wolf that lived alongside the Neanderthals .
This cancer is remarkable .
Its the oldest mammalian - derived life form that we know of .
Its a living relic of the distant past .
So weve seen that this can happen in animals .
Could cancers be contagious between people ?
Well this is a question which fascinated Chester Southam , a cancer doctor in the 1950s .
Ad he decided to put this to the test by actually deliberately inoculating people with cancer from somebody else .
And this is a photograph of Dr . Southam in 1957 injecting cancer into a volunteer , who in this case was an inmate in Ohio State Penitentiary .
Most of the people that Dr . Southam injected did not go on to develop cancer from the injected cells .
But a small number of them did , and they were mostly people who were otherwise ill  -  -  whose immune systems were probably compromised .
What this tells us , ethical issues aside , is that ...
its probably extremely rare for cancers to be transferred between people .
However , under some circumstances , it can happen .
And I think that this is something that oncologists and epidemiologists should be aware of in the future .
So just finally , cancer is an inevitable outcome of the ability of our cells to divide and to adapt to their environments .
But that does not mean that we should give up hope in the fight against cancer .
In fact , I believe , given more knowledge of the complex evolutionary processes that drive cancers growth , we can defeat cancer .
My personal aim is to defeat the Tasmanian devil cancer .
Lets prevent the Tasmanian devil from being the first animal to go extinct from cancer .
Thank you .
Derek Paravicini and Adam Ockelford : In the key of genius
Born three and a half months prematurely , Derek Paravicini is blind and has severe autism . But with perfect pitch , innate talent and a lot of practice , he became an acclaimed concert pianist by the age of 10 . Here , his longtime piano teacher , Adam Ockelford , explains his students unique relationship to music , while Paravicini shows how he has ripped up the  Chopsticks  rule book .
Adam Ockelford : I promise there wont be too much of me talking , and a lot of Derek playing , but I thought it would just be nice to recap on how Derek got to where he is today .
Its amazing now , because hes so much bigger than me , but when Derek was born , he could have fitted on the palm of your hand .
He was born three and a half months premature , and really it was a fantastic fight for him to survive .
He had to have a lot of oxygen , and that affected your eyes , Derek , and also the way you understand language and the way you understand the world .
But that was the end of the bad news , because when Derek came home from the hospital , his family decided to employ the redoubtable nanny who was going to look after you , Derek , really for the rest of your childhood .
And Nannys great insight , really , was to think , heres a child who cant see .
Music must be the thing for Derek .
And sure enough , she sang , or as Derek called it , warbled , to him for his first few years of life .
And I think it was that excitement with hearing her voice hour after hour every day that made him think maybe , you know , in his brain something was stirring , some sort of musical gift .
Heres a little picture of Derek going up now , when you were with your nanny .
Now Nannys great other insight was to think , perhaps we should get Derek something to play , and sure enough , she dragged this little keyboard out of the loft , never thinking really that anything much would come of it .
But Derek , your tiny hand must have gone out to that thing and actually bashed it , bashed it so hard they thought it was going to break .
But out of all the bashing , after a few months , emerged the most fantastic music , and I think there was just a miracle moment , really , Derek , when you realized that all the sounds you hear in the world out there is something that you can copy on the keyboard .
That was the great eureka moment .
Now , not being able to see meant , of course , that you taught yourself .
Derek Paravicini : I taught myself to play .
AO : You did teach yourself to play , and as a consequence , playing the piano for you , Derek , was a lot of knuckles and karate chops , and even a bit of nose going on in there .
And now , heres what Nanny did also do was to press the record button on one of those little early tape recorders that they had , and this is a wonderful tape , now , of Derek playing when you were four years old .
DP :  Molly Malone . 
AO : It wasnt actually  Cockles and Mussels . 
This one is  English Country Garden . 
DP :  English Country Garden . 
AO : There you are .
I think thats just fantastic .
You know , theres this little child who cant see , cant really understand much about the world , has no one in the family who plays an instrument , and yet he taught himself to play that .
And as you can see from the picture , there was quite a lot of body action going on while you were playing , Derek .
Now , along  -  -  Derek and I met when he was four and a half years old , and at first , Derek , I thought you were mad , to be honest , because when you played the piano , you seemed to want to play every single note on the keyboard , and also you had this little habit of hitting me out of the way .
So as soon as I tried to get near the piano , I was firmly shoved off .
And having said to your dad , Nic , that I would try to teach you , I was then slightly confused as to how I might go about that if I wasnt allowed near the piano .
But after a while , I thought , well , the only way is to just pick you up , shove Derek over to the other side of the room , and in the 10 seconds that I got before Derek came back , I could just play something very quickly for him to learn .
And in the end , Derek , I think you agreed that we could actually have some fun playing the piano together .
As you can see , theres me in my early , pre - marriage days with a brown beard , and little Derek concentrating there .
I just realized this is going to be recorded , isnt it ? Right . Okay .
Now then , by the age of 10 , Derek really had taken the world by storm .
This is a photo of you , Derek , playing at the Barbican with the Royal Philharmonic Pops .
Basically it was just an exciting journey , really .
And in those days , Derek , you didnt speak very much , and so there was always a moment of tension as to whether youd actually understood what it was we were going to play and whether youd play the right piece in the right key , and all that kind of thing .
But the orchestra were wowed as well , and the press of the world were fascinated by your ability to play these fantastic pieces .
Now the question is , how do you do it , Derek ?
And hopefully we can show the audience now how it is you do what you do .
I think that one of the first things that happened when you were very little , Derek , was that by the time you were two , your musical ear had already outstripped that of most adults .
And so whenever you heard any note at all  -  -  if I just play a random note  -  -   -  -  you knew instantly what it was , and youd got the ability as well to find that note on the piano .
Now thats called perfect pitch , and some people have perfect pitch for a few white notes in the middle of the piano .
You can see how  -  -  you get a sense of playing with Derek .
But Derek , your ear is so much more than that .
If I just put the microphone down for a bit , Im going to play a cluster of notes .
Those of you who can see will know how many notes , but Derek , of course , cant .
Not only can you say how many notes , its being able to play them all at the same time . Here we are .
Well , forget the terminology , Derek . Fantastic .
And its that ability , that ability to hear simultaneous sounds , not only just single sounds , but when a whole orchestra is playing , Derek , you can hear every note , and instantly , through all those hours and hours of practice , reproduce those on the keyboard , that makes you , I think , is the basis of all your ability .
Now then .
Its no use having that kind of raw ability without the technique , and luckily , Derek , you decided that , once we did start learning , youd let me help you learn all the scale fingerings .
So for example using your thumb under with C major .
Etc .
And in the end , you got so quick , that things like  Flight of the Bumblebee  were no problem , were they ?
DP : No .
AO : Right . So here , by the age of 11 , Derek was playing things like this .
DP : This .
AO : Derek , lets have a bow .
Well done .
Now the truly amazing thing was , with all those scales , Derek , you could not only play  Flight of the Bumblebee  in the usual key , but any note I play , Derek can play it on .
So if I just choose a note at random , like that one .
Can you play  Flight of the Bumblebee  on that note ?
DP :  Flight of the Bumblebee  on that note .
AO : Or another one ? How about in G minor ?
DP : G minor .
AO : Fantastic . Well done , Derek .
So you see , in your brain , Derek , is this amazing musical computer that can instantly recalibrate , recalculate , all the pieces in the world that are out there .
Most pianists would have a heart attack if you said ,  Sorry , do you mind playing Flight of the Bumblebee in B minor instead of A minor ?  as we went on .
In fact , the first time , Derek , you played that with an orchestra , youd learned the version that youd learned , and then the orchestra , in fact , did have a different version , so while we were waiting in the two hours before the rehearsal and the concert , Derek listened to the different version and learned it quickly and then was able to play it with the orchestra .
Fantastic chap .
The other wonderful thing about you is memory .
DP : Memory . AO : Your memory is truly amazing , and every concert we do , we ask the audience to participate , of course , by suggesting a piece Derek might like to play .
And people say ,  Well , thats terribly brave because what happens if Derek doesnt know it ? 
And I say ,  No , its not brave at all , because if you ask for something that Derek doesnt know , youre invited to come and sing it first , and then hell pick it up . 
So just be thoughtful before you suggest something too outlandish .
But seriously , would anyone like to choose a piece ?
DP : Choose a piece . Choose , choose , would you like to choose ? AO : Because its quite dark . Youll just have to shout out .
Would you like to hear me play ?
AO : Paganini . DP :  The Theme of Paganini . 
AO : Well done .
Dereks going to L.A . soon , and its a milestone , because it means that Derek and I will have spent over 100 hours on long - haul flights together , which is quite interesting , isnt it Derek ?
DP : Very interesting , Adam , yes . Long - haul flights . Yes .
AO : You may think 13 hours is a long time to keep talking , but Derek does it effortlessly . Now then .
But in America , theyve coined this term ,  the human iPod  for Derek , which I think is just missing the point , really , because Derek , youre so much more than an iPod .
Youre a fantastic , creative musician , and I think that was nowhere clearer to see , really , than when we went to Slovenia , and someone  -  -  in a longer concert we tend to get people joining in , and this person , very , very nervously came onto the stage .
DP : He played  Chopsticks .  AO : And played  Chopsticks . 
DP :  Chopsticks . 
AO : A bit like this . DP : Like this . Yes .
AO : I should really get Dereks manager to come and play it .
Hes sitting there .
DP : Somebody played  Chopsticks  like this . AO : Just teasing , right ? Here we go .
DP : Let Derek play it .
AO : What did you do with it , Derek ?
DP : I got to improvise with it , Adam .
AO : This is Derek the musician .
Keep up with Derek .
The TED people will kill me , but perhaps theres time for one encore .
DP : For one encore . AO : One encore , yes .
So this is one of Dereks heroes .
Its the great Art Tatum  -  -  DP : Art Tatum .
AO :  -  -  who also was a pianist who couldnt see , and also , I think , like Derek , thought that all the world was a piano , so whenever Art Tatum plays something , it sounds like theres three pianos in the room .
And here is Dereks take on Art Tatums take on  Tiger Rag . 
DP :  Tiger Rag . 
Bjorn Lomborg : Global priorities bigger than climate change
Given $ 50 billion to spend , which would you solve first , AIDS or global warming ? Danish political scientist Bjorn Lomborg comes up with surprising answers .
What Id like to talk about is really the biggest problems in the world .
Im not going to talk about  The Skeptical Environmentalist   -  -  probably thats also a good choice .
But I am going talk about : what are the big problems in the world ?
And I must say , before I go on , I should ask every one of you to try and get out pen and paper because Im actually going to ask you to help me to look at how we do that .
So get out your pen and paper .
Bottom line is , there is a lot of problems out there in the world .
Im just going to list some of them .
There are 800 million people starving .
Theres a billion people without clean drinking water .
Two billion people without sanitation .
There are several million people dying of HIV and AIDS .
The lists go on and on .
Theres two billions of people who will be severely affected by climate change  -  -  so on .
There are many , many problems out there .
In an ideal world , we would solve them all , but we dont .
We dont actually solve all problems .
And if we do not , the question I think we need to ask ourselves  -  -  and thats why its on the economy session  -  -  is to say , which ones should we solve first ?
And thats the question Id like to ask you .
If we had say , 50 billion dollars over the next four years to spend to do good in this world , where should we spend it ?
We identified 10 of the biggest challenges in the world , and I will just briefly read them : climate change , communicable diseases , conflicts , education , financial instability , governance and corruption , malnutrition and hunger , population migration , sanitation and water , and subsidies and trade barriers .
We believe that these in many ways encompass the biggest problems in the world .
The obvious question would be to ask , what do you think are the biggest things ?
Where should we start on solving these problems ?
But thats a wrong problem to ask .
That was actually the problem that was asked in Davos in January .
But of course , theres a problem in asking people to focus on problems .
Because we cant solve problems .
Surely the biggest problem we have in the world is that we all die .
But we dont have a technology to solve that , right ?
So the point is not to prioritize problems , but the point is to prioritize solutions to problems .
And that would be  -  -  of course that gets a little more complicated .
To climate change that would be like Kyoto .
To communicable diseases , it might be health clinics or mosquito nets .
To conflicts , it would be U.N . s peacekeeping forces , and so on .
The point that I would like to ask you to try to do , is just in 30 seconds  -  -  and I know this is in a sense an impossible task  -  -  write down what you think is probably some of the top priorities .
And also  -  -  and thats , of course , where economics gets evil  -  -  to put down what are the things we should not do , first .
What should be at the bottom of the list ?
Please , just take 30 seconds , perhaps talk to your neighbor , and just figure out what should be the top priorities and the bottom priorities of the solutions that we have to the worlds biggest issues .
The amazing part of this process  -  -  and of course , I mean , I would love to  -  -  I only have 18 minutes , Ive already given you quite a substantial amount of my time , right ?
Id love to go into , and get you to think about this process , and thats actually what we did .
And I also strongly encourage you , and Im sure well also have these discussions afterwards , to think about , how do we actually prioritize ?
Of course , you have to ask yourself , why on Earth was such a list never done before ?
And one reason is that prioritization is incredibly uncomfortable .
Nobody wants to do this .
Of course , every organization would love to be on the top of such a list .
But every organization would also hate to be not on the top of the list .
And since there are many more not - number - one spots on the list than there is number ones , it makes perfect sense not to want to do such a list .
Weve had the U.N . for almost 60 years , yet weve never actually made a fundamental list of all the big things that we can do in the world , and said , which of them should we do first ?
So it doesnt mean that we are not prioritizing  -  -  any decision is a prioritization , so of course we are still prioritizing , if only implicitly  -  -  and thats unlikely to be as good as if we actually did the prioritization , and went in and talked about it .
So what Im proposing is really to say that we have , for a very long time , had a situation when weve had a menu of choices .
There are many , many things we can do out there , but weve not had the prices , nor the sizes .
We have not had an idea .
Imagine going into a restaurant and getting this big menu card , but you have no idea what the price is .
You know , you have a pizza ; youve no idea what the price is .
It could be at one dollar ; it could be 1,000 dollars .
It could be a family - size pizza ; it could be a very individual - size pizza , right ?
Wed like to know these things .
And that is what the Copenhagen Consensus is really trying to do  -  -  to try to put prices on these issues .
And so basically , this has been the Copenhagen Consensus process .
We got 30 of the worlds best economists , three in each area .
So we have three of worlds top economists write about climate change .
What can we do ? What will be the cost and what will be the benefit of that ?
Likewise in communicable diseases .
Three of the worlds top experts saying , what can we do ?
What would be the price ?
What should we do about it , and what will be the outcome ?
And so on .
Then we had some of the worlds top economists , eight of the worlds top economists , including three Nobel Laureates , meet in Copenhagen in May 2004 .
We called them the  dream team . 
The Cambridge University prefects decided to call them the Real Madrid of economics .
That works very well in Europe , but it doesnt really work over here .
And what they basically did was come out with a prioritized list .
And then you ask , why economists ?
And of course , Im very happy you asked that question  -  -   -  -  because thats a very good question .
The point is , of course , if you want to know about malaria , you ask a malaria expert .
If you want to know about climate , you ask a climatologist .
But if you want to know which of the two you should deal with first , you cant ask either of them , because thats not what they do .
That is what economists do .
They prioritize .
They make that in some ways disgusting task of saying , which one should we do first , and which one should we do afterwards ?
So this is the list , and this is the one Id like to share with you .
Of course , you can also see it on the website , and well also talk about it more , Im sure , as the day goes on .
They basically came up with a list where they said there were bad projects  -  -  basically , projects where if you invest a dollar , you get less than a dollar back .
Then theres fair projects , good projects and very good projects .
And of course , its the very good projects we should start doing .
Im going to go from backwards so that we end up with the best projects .
These were the bad projects .
As you might see the bottom of the list was climate change .
This offends a lot of people , and thats probably one of the things where people will say I shouldnt come back , either .
And Id like to talk about that , because thats really curious .
Why is it it came up ?
And Ill actually also try to get back to this because its probably one of the things that well disagree with on the list that you wrote down .
The reason why they came up with saying that Kyoto  -  -  or doing something more than Kyoto  -  -  is a bad deal is simply because its very inefficient .
Its not saying that global warming is not happening .
Its not saying that its not a big problem .
But its saying that what we can do about it is very little , at a very high cost .
What they basically show us , the average of all macroeconomic models , is that Kyoto , if everyone agreed , would cost about 150 billion dollars a year .
Thats a substantial amount of money .
Thats two to three times the global development aid that we give the Third World every year .
Yet it would do very little good .
All models show it will postpone warming for about six years in 2100 .
So the guy in Bangladesh who gets a flood in 2100 can wait until 2106 .
Which is a little good , but not very much good .
So the idea here really is to say , well , weve spent a lot of money doing a little good .
And just to give you a sense of reference , the U.N . actually estimate that for half that amount , for about 75 billion dollars a year , we could solve all major basic problems in the world .
We could give clean drinking water , sanitation , basic healthcare and education to every single human being on the planet .
So we have to ask ourselves , do we want to spend twice the amount on doing very little good ?
Or half the amount on doing an amazing amount of good ?
And that is really why it becomes a bad project .
Its not to say that if we had all the money in the world , we wouldnt want to do it .
But its to say , when we dont , its just simply not our first priority .
The fair projects  -  -  notice Im not going to comment on all these  -  -  but communicable diseases , scale of basic health services  -  -  just made it , simply because , yes , scale of basic health services is a great thing .
It would do a lot of good , but its also very , very costly .
Again , what it tells us is suddenly we start thinking about both sides of the equation .
If you look at the good projects , a lot of sanitation and water projects came in .
Again , sanitation and water is incredibly important , but it also costs a lot of infrastructure .
So Id like to show you the top four priorities which should be at least the first ones that we deal with when we talk about how we should deal with the problems in the world .
The fourth best problem is malaria  -  -  dealing with malaria .
The incidence of malaria is about a couple of  million  people get infected every year .
It might even cost up towards a percentage point of GDP every year for affected nations .
If we invested about 13 billion dollars over the next four years , we could bring that incidence down to half .
We could avoid about 500,000 people dying , but perhaps more importantly , we could avoid about a  million  people getting infected every year .
We would significantly increase their ability to deal with many of the other problems that they have to deal with  -  -  of course , in the long run , also to deal with global warming .
This third best one was free trade .
Basically , the model showed that if we could get free trade , and especially cut subsidies in the U.S . and Europe , we could basically enliven the global economy to an astounding number of about 2,400 billion dollars a year , half of which would accrue to the Third World .
Again , the point is to say that we could actually pull two to three hundred million people out of poverty , very radically fast , in about two to five years .
That would be the third best thing we could do .
The second best thing would be to focus on malnutrition .
Not just malnutrition in general , but theres a very cheap way of dealing with malnutrition , namely , the lack of micronutrients .
Basically , about half of the worlds population is lacking in iron , zinc , iodine and vitamin A .
If we invest about 12 billion dollars , we could make a severe inroad into that problem .
That would be the second best investment that we could do .
And the very best project would be to focus on HIV / AIDS .
Basically , if we invest 27 billion dollars over the next eight years , we could avoid 28 new million cases of HIV / AIDS .
Again , what this does and what it focuses on is saying there are two very different ways that we can deal with HIV / AIDS .
One is treatment ; the other one is prevention .
And again , in an ideal world , we would do both .
But in a world where we dont do either , or dont do it very well , we have to at least ask ourselves where should we invest first .
And treatment is much , much more expensive than prevention .
So basically , what this focuses on is saying , we can do a lot more by investing in prevention .
Basically for the amount of money that we spend , we can do X amount of good in treatment , and 10 times as much good in prevention .
So again , what we focus on is prevention rather than treatment , at first rate .
What this really does is that it makes us think about our priorities .
Id like to have you look at your priority list and say , did you get it right ?
Or did you get close to what we came up with here ?
Well , of course , one of the things is climate change again .
I find a lot of people find it very , very unlikely that we should do that .
We should also do climate change , if for no other reason , simply because its such a big problem .
But of course , we dont do all problems .
There are many problems out there in the world .
And what I want to make sure of is , if we actually focus on problems , that we focus on the right ones .
The ones where we can do a lot of good rather than a little good .
And I think , actually  -  -  Thomas Schelling , one of the participants in the dream team , he put it very , very well .
One of things that people forget , is that in 100 years , when were talking about most of the climate change impacts will be , people will be much , much richer .
Even the most pessimistic impact scenarios of the U.N .
estimate that the average person in the developing world in 2100 will be about as rich as we are today .
Much more likely , they will be two to four times richer than we are .
And of course , well be even richer than that .
But the point is to say , when we talk about saving people , or helping people in Bangladesh in 2100 , were not talking about a poor Bangladeshi .
Were actually talking about a fairly rich Dutch guy .
do we want to spend a lot of money helping a little , 100 years from now , a fairly rich Dutch guy ?
Or do we want to help real poor people , right now , in Bangladesh , who really need the help , and whom we can help very , very cheaply ?
Or as Schelling put it , imagine if you were a rich  -  -  as you will be  -  -  a rich Chinese , a rich Bolivian , a rich Congolese , in 2100 , thinking back on 2005 , and saying ,  How odd that they cared so much about helping me a little bit through climate change , and cared so fairly little about helping my grandfather and my great grandfather , whom they could have helped so much more , and who needed the help so much more ? 
So I think that really does tell us why it is we need to get our priorities straight .
Even if it doesnt accord to the typical way we see this problem .
Of course , thats mainly because climate change has good pictures .
We have , you know ,  The Day After Tomorrow   -  -  it looks great , right ?
Its a good film in the sense that I certainly want to see it , right , but dont expect Emmerich to cast Brad Pitt in his next movie digging latrines in Tanzania or something .
It just doesnt make for as much of a movie .
So in many ways , I think of the Copenhagen Consensus and the whole discussion of priorities as a defense for boring problems .
To make sure that we realize its not about making us feel good .
Its not about making things that have the most media attention , but its about making places where we can actually do the most good .
The other objections , I think , that are important to say , is that Im somehow  -  -  or we are somehow  -  -  positing a false choice .
Of course , we should do all things , in an ideal world  -  -  I would certainly agree .
I think we should do all things , but we dont .
In 1970 , the developed world decided we were going to spend twice as much as we did , right now , than in 1970 , on the developing world .
Since then our aid has halved .
So it doesnt look like were actually on the path of suddenly solving all big problems .
Likewise , people are also saying , but what about the Iraq war ?
You know , we spend 100 billion dollars  -  -  why dont we spend that on doing good in the world ?
Im all for that .
If any one of you guys can talk Bush into doing that , thats fine .
But the point , of course , is still to say , if you get another 100 billion dollars , we still want to spend that in the best possible way , dont we ?
So the real issue here is to get ourselves back and think about what are the right priorities .
I should just mention briefly , is this really the right list that we got out ?
You know , when you ask the worlds best economists , you inevitably end up asking old , white American men .
And theyre not necessarily , you know , great ways of looking at the entire world .
So we actually invited 80 young people from all over the world to come and solve the same problem .
The only two requirements were that they were studying at the university , and they spoke English .
The majority of them were , first , from developing countries .
They had all the same material but they could go vastly outside the scope of discussion , and they certainly did , to come up with their own lists .
And the surprising thing was that the list was very similar  -  -  with malnutrition and diseases at the top and climate change at the bottom .
Weve done this many other times .
Theres been many other seminars and university students , and different things .
They all come out with very much the same list .
And that gives me great hope , really , in saying that I do believe that there is a path ahead to get us to start thinking about priorities , and saying , what is the important thing in the world ?
Of course , in an ideal world , again wed love to do everything .
But if we dont do it , then we can start thinking about where should we start ?
I see the Copenhagen Consensus as a process .
We did it in 2004 , and we hope to assemble many more people , getting much better information for 2008 , 2012 .
Map out the right path for the world  -  -  but also to start thinking about political triage .
To start thinking about saying ,  Lets do not the things where we can do very little at a very high cost , not the things that we dont know how to do , but lets do the great things where we can do an enormous amount of good , at very low cost , right now . 
At the end of the day , you can disagree with the discussion of how we actually prioritize these , but we have to be honest and frank about saying , if theres some things we do , there are other things we dont do .
If we worry too much about some things , we end by not worrying about other things .
So I hope this will help us make better priorities , and think about how we better work for the world .
Thank you .
Bill Gates : Mosquitos , malaria and education
Bill Gates hopes to solve some of the worlds biggest problems using a new kind of philanthropy . In a passionate and , yes , funny 18 minutes , he asks us to consider two big questions and how we might answer them .
I wrote a letter last week talking about the work of the foundation , sharing some of the problems .
And Warren Buffet had recommended I do that  -  -  being honest about what was going well , what wasnt , and making it kind of an annual thing .
A goal I had there was to draw more people in to work on those problems , because I think there are some very important problems that dont get worked on naturally .
That is , the market does not drive the scientists , the communicators , the thinkers , the governments to do the right things .
And only by paying attention to these things and having brilliant people who care and draw other people in can we make as much progress as we need to .
So this morning Im going to share two of these problems and talk about where they stand .
But before I dive into those I want to admit that I am an optimist .
Any tough problem , I think it can be solved .
And part of the reason I feel that way is looking at the past .
Over the past century , average lifespan has more than doubled .
Another statistic , perhaps my favorite , is to look at childhood deaths .
As recently as 1960 , 110 million children were born , and 20 million of those died before the age of five .
Five years ago , 135 million children were born  -  -  so , more  -  -  and less than 10 million of them died before the age of five .
So thats a factor of two reduction of the childhood death rate .
Its a phenomenal thing .
Each one of those lives matters a lot .
And the key reason we were able to it was not only rising incomes but also a few key breakthroughs : vaccines that were used more widely .
For example , measles was four million of the deaths back as recently as 1990 and now is under 400,000 .
So we really can make changes .
The next breakthrough is to cut that 10 million in half again .
And I think thats doable in well under 20 years .
Why ? Well theres only a few diseases that account for the vast majority of those deaths : diarrhea , pneumonia and malaria .
So that brings us to the first problem that Ill raise this morning , which is how do we stop a deadly disease thats spread by mosquitos ?
Well , whats the history of this disease ?
Its been a severe disease for thousands of years .
In fact , if we look at the genetic code , its the only disease we can see that people who lived in Africa actually evolved several things to avoid malarial deaths .
Deaths actually peaked at a bit over five million in the 1930s .
So it was absolutely gigantic .
And the disease was all over the world .
A terrible disease . It was in the United States . It was in Europe .
People didnt know what caused it until the early 1900s , when a British military man figured out that it was mosquitos .
So it was everywhere .
And two tools helped bring the death rate down .
One was killing the mosquitos with DDT .
The other was treating the patients with quinine , or quinine derivatives .
And so thats why the death rate did come down .
Now , ironically , what happened was it was eliminated from all the temperate zones , which is where the rich countries are .
So we can see : 1900 , its everywhere .
1945 , its still most places .
1970 , the U.S . and most of Europe have gotten rid of it .
1990 , youve gotten most of the northern areas .
And more recently you can see its just around the equator .
And so this leads to the paradox that because the disease is only in the poorer countries , it doesnt get much investment .
For example , theres more money put into baldness drugs than are put into malaria .
Now , baldness , its a terrible thing .
And rich men are afflicted .
And so thats why that priority has been set .
But , malaria  -  -  even the million deaths a year caused by malaria greatly understate its impact .
Over 200 million people at any one time are suffering from it .
It means that you cant get the economies in these areas going because it just holds things back so much .
Now , malaria is of course transmitted by mosquitos .
I brought some here , just so you could experience this .
Well let those roam around the auditorium a little bit .
Theres no reason only poor people should have the experience .
Those mosquitos are not infected .
So weve come up with a few new things . Weve got bed nets .
And bed nets are a great tool .
What it means is the mother and child stay under the bed net at night , so the mosquitos that bite late at night cant get at them .
And when you use indoor spraying with DDT and those nets you can cut deaths by over 50 percent .
And thats happened now in a number of countries .
Its great to see .
But we have to be careful because malaria  -  -  the parasite evolves and the mosquito evolves .
So every tool that weve ever had in the past has eventually become ineffective .
And so you end up with two choices .
If you go into a country with the right tools and the right way , you do it vigorously , you can actually get a local eradication .
And thats where we saw the malaria map shrinking .
Or , if you go in kind of half - heartedly , for a period of time youll reduce the disease burden , but eventually those tools will become ineffective , and the death rate will soar back up again .
And the world has gone through this where it paid attention and then didnt pay attention .
Now were on the upswing .
Bed net funding is up .
Theres new drug discovery going on .
Our foundation has backed a vaccine thats going into phase three trial that starts in a couple months .
And that should save over two thirds of the lives if its effective .
So were going to have these new tools .
But that alone doesnt give us the road map .
Because the road map to get rid of this disease involves many things .
It involves communicators to keep the funding high , to keep the visibility high , to tell the success stories .
It involves social scientists , so we know how to get not just 70 percent of the people to use the bed nets , but 90 percent .
We need mathematicians to come in and simulate this , to do Monte Carlo things to understand how these tools combine and work together .
Of course we need drug companies to give us their expertise .
We need rich - world governments to be very generous in providing aid for these things .
And so as these elements come together , Im quite optimistic that we will be able to eradicate malaria .
Now let me turn to a second question , a fairly different question , but Id say equally important .
And this is : How do you make a teacher great ?
It seems like the kind of question that people would spend a lot of time on , and wed understand very well .
And the answer is , really , that we dont .
Lets start with why this is important .
Well , all of us here , Ill bet , had some great teachers .
We all had a wonderful education .
Thats part of the reason were here today , part of the reason were successful .
I can say that , even though Im a college drop - out .
I had great teachers .
In fact , in the United States , the teaching system has worked fairly well .
There are fairly effective teachers in a narrow set of places .
So the top 20 percent of students have gotten a good education .
And those top 20 percent have been the best in the world , if you measure them against the other top 20 percent .
And theyve gone on to create the revolutions in software and biotechnology and keep the U.S . at the forefront .
Now , the strength for those top 20 percent is starting to fade on a relative basis , but even more concerning is the education that the balance of people are getting .
Not only has that been weak . its getting weaker .
And if you look at the economy , it really is only providing opportunities now to people with a better education .
And we have to change this .
We have to change it so that people have equal opportunity .
We have to change it so that the country is strong and stays at the forefront of things that are driven by advanced education , like science and mathematics .
When I first learned the statistics , I was pretty stunned at how bad things are .
Over 30 percent of kids never finish high school .
And that had been covered up for a long time because they always took the dropout rate as the number who started in senior year and compared it to the number who finished senior year .
Because they werent tracking where the kids were before that .
But most of the dropouts had taken place before that .
They had to raise the stated dropout rate as soon as that tracking was done to over 30 percent .
For minority kids , its over 50 percent .
And even if you graduate from high school , if youre low - income , you have less than a 25 percent chance of ever completing a college degree .
If youre low - income in the United States , you have a higher chance of going to jail than you do of getting a four - year degree .
And that doesnt seem entirely fair .
So , how do you make education better ?
Now , our foundation , for the last nine years , has invested in this .
Theres many people working on it .
Weve worked on small schools , weve funded scholarships , weve done things in libraries .
A lot of these things had a good effect .
But the more we looked at it , the more we realized that having great teachers was the very key thing .
And we hooked up with some people studying how much variation is there between teachers , between , say , the top quartile  -  -  the very best  -  -  and the bottom quartile .
How much variation is there within a school or between schools ?
And the answer is that these variations are absolutely unbelievable .
A top quartile teacher will increase the performance of their class  -  -  based on test scores  -  -  by over 10 percent in a single year .
What does that mean ?
That means that if the entire U.S . , for two years , had top quartile teachers , the entire difference between us and Asia would go away .
Within four years we would be blowing everyone in the world away .
So , its simple . All you need are those top quartile teachers .
And so youd say ,  Wow , we should reward those people .
We should retain those people .
We should find out what theyre doing and transfer that skill to other people . 
But I can tell you that absolutely is not happening today .
What are the characteristics of this top quartile ?
What do they look like ?
You might think these must be very senior teachers .
And the answer is no .
Once somebody has taught for three years their teaching quality does not change thereafter .
The variation is very , very small .
You might think these are people with masters degrees .
Theyve gone back and theyve gotten their Masters of Education .
This chart takes four different factors and says how much do they explain teaching quality .
That bottom thing , which says theres no effect at all , is a masters degree .
Now , the way the pay system works is theres two things that are rewarded .
One is seniority .
Because your pay goes up and you vest into your pension .
The second is giving extra money to people who get their masters degree .
But it in no way is associated with being a better teacher .
Teach for America : slight effect .
For math teachers majoring in math theres a measurable effect .
But , overwhelmingly , its your past performance .
There are some people who are very good at this .
And weve done almost nothing to study what that is and to draw it in and to replicate it , to raise the average capability  -  -  or to encourage the people with it to stay in the system .
You might say ,  Do the good teachers stay and the bad teachers leave ? 
The answer is , on average , the slightly better teachers leave the system .
And its a system with very high turnover .
Now , there are a few places  -  -  very few  -  -  where great teachers are being made .
A good example of one is a set of charter schools called KIPP .
KIPP means Knowledge Is Power .
Its an unbelievable thing .
They have 66 schools  -  -  mostly middle schools , some high schools  -  -  and what goes on is great teaching .
They take the poorest kids , and over 96 percent of their high school graduates go to four - year colleges .
And the whole spirit and attitude in those schools is very different than in the normal public schools .
Theyre team teaching . Theyre constantly improving their teachers .
Theyre taking data , the test scores , and saying to a teacher ,  Hey , you caused this amount of increase . 
Theyre deeply engaged in making teaching better .
When you actually go and sit in one of these classrooms , at first its very bizarre .
I sat down and I thought ,  What is going on ? 
The teacher was running around , and the energy level was high .
I thought ,  Im in the sports rally or something .
Whats going on ? 
And the teacher was constantly scanning to see which kids werent paying attention , which kids were bored , and calling kids rapidly , putting things up on the board .
It was a very dynamic environment , because particularly in those middle school years  -  -  fifth through eighth grade  -  -  keeping people engaged and setting the tone that everybody in the classroom needs to pay attention , nobody gets to make fun of it or have the position of the kid who doesnt want to be there .
Everybody needs to be involved .
And so KIPP is doing it .
How does that compare to a normal school ?
Well , in a normal school , teachers arent told how good they are .
The data isnt gathered .
In the teachers contract , it will limit the number of times the principal can come into the classroom  -  -  sometimes to once per year .
And they need advanced notice to do that .
So imagine running a factory where youve got these workers , some of them just making crap and the management is told ,  Hey , you can only come down here once a year , but you need to let us know , because we might actually fool you , and try and do a good job in that one brief moment . 
Even a teacher who wants to improve doesnt have the tools to do it .
They dont have the test scores , and theres a whole thing of trying to block the data .
For example , New York passed a law that said that the teacher improvement data could not be made available and used in the tenure decision for the teachers .
And so thats sort of working in the opposite direction .
But Im optimistic about this , I think there are some clear things we can do .
First of all , theres a lot more testing going on , and thats given us the picture of where we are .
And that allows us to understand whos doing it well , and call them out , and find out what those techniques are .
Of course , digital video is cheap now .
Putting a few cameras in the classroom and saying that things are being recorded on an ongoing basis is very practical in all public schools .
And so every few weeks teachers could sit down and say ,  OK , heres a little clip of something I thought I did well .
Heres a little clip of something I think I did poorly .
Advise me  -  -  when this kid acted up , how should I have dealt with that ? 
And they could all sit and work together on those problems .
You can take the very best teachers and kind of annotate it , have it so everyone sees who is the very best at teaching this stuff .
You can take those great courses and make them available so that a kid could go out and watch the physics course , learn from that .
If you have a kid whos behind , you would know you could assign them that video to watch and review the concept .
And in fact , these free courses could not only be available just on the Internet , but you could make it so that DVDs were always available , and so anybody who has access to a DVD player can have the very best teachers .
And so by thinking of this as a personnel system , we can do it much better .
Now theres a book actually , about KIPP  -  -  the place that this is going on  -  -  that Jay Matthews , a news reporter , wrote  -  -  called ,  Work Hard , Be Nice . 
And I thought it was so fantastic .
It gave you a sense of what a good teacher does .
Im going to send everyone here a free copy of this book .
Now , we put a lot of money into education , and I really think that education is the most important thing to get right for the country to have as strong a future as it should have .
In fact we have in the stimulus bill  -  -  its interesting  -  -  the House version actually had money in it for these data systems , and it was taken out in the Senate because there are people who are threatened by these things .
But I  -  -  Im optimistic .
I think people are beginning to recognize how important this is , and it really can make a difference for millions of lives , if we get it right .
I only had time to frame those two problems .
Theres a lot more problems like that  -  -  AIDS , pneumonia  -  -  I can just see youre getting excited , just at the very name of these things .
And the skill sets required to tackle these things are very broad .
You know , the system doesnt naturally make it happen .
Governments dont naturally pick these things in the right way .
The private sector doesnt naturally put its resources into these things .
So its going to take brilliant people like you to study these things , get other people involved  -  -  and youre helping to come up with solutions .
And with that , I think theres some great things that will come out of it .
Thank you .
Suheir Hammad : Poems of war , peace , women , power
Poet Suheir Hammad performs two spine - tingling spoken - word pieces :  What I Will  and  break   -  -  meditations on war and peace , on women and power . Wait for the astonishing line :  Do not fear what has blown up . If you must , fear the unexploded . 
 What I Will  I will not dance to your war drum .
I will not lend my soul nor my bones to your war drum .
I will not dance to that beating .
I know that beat .
It is lifeless .
I know intimately that skin you are hitting .
It was alive once , hunted , stolen , stretched .
I will not dance to your drummed - up war .
I will not pop , spin , break for you .
I will not hate for you or even hate you .
I will not kill for you .
Especially I will not die for you .
I will not mourn the dead with murder nor suicide .
I will not side with you or dance to bombs because everyone is dancing .
Everyone can be wrong .
Life is a right , not collateral or casual .
I will not forget where I come from .
I will craft my own drum .
Gather my beloved near , and our chanting will be dancing .
Our humming will be drumming .
I will not be played .
I will not lend my name nor my rhythm to your beat .
I will dance and resist and dance and persist and dance .
This heartbeat is louder than death .
Your war drum aint louder than this breath . Haaa .
Whats up TED people ? Let me hear you make some noise .
A bunch of pacifists .
Confused , aspiring pacifists .
I understand .
Ive been wrong a lot lately .
Like a lot .
So I couldnt figure out what to read today .
I mean , Ive been saying Ive been prepping .
What that means is prepping my outfit , prepping options , trying to figure out what Im coming behind and going in front of .
Poetry does that .
It preps you . It aims you .
So I am going to read a poem that was chosen just now .
But Im going to need you to just sit for like 10 minutes and hold a woman who is not here .
Hold her now with you .
You dont need to say her name out loud , you can just hold her .
Are you holding her ?
This is  Break Clustered . 
All holy history banned .
Unwritten books predicted the future , projected the past .
But my head unwraps around what appears limitless , mans creative violence .
Whose son shall it be ?
Which male child will perish a new day ?
Our boys deaths galvanize .
We cherish corpses .
We mourn women , complicated .
Bitches get beat daily .
Profits made , prophets ignored .
War and tooth , enameled salted lemon childhoods .
All colors run , none of us solid .
Dont look for shadow behind me . I carry it within .
I live cycles of light and darkness .
Rhythm is half silence .
I see now , I never was one and not the other .
Sickness , health , tender violence .
I think now I never was pure .
Before form I was storm , blind , ignant  -  -  still am .
Human contracted itself blind , malignant .
I never was pure .
Girl spoiled before ripened .
Language cant math me .
I experience exponentially .
Everything is everything .
One woman loses 15 , maybe 20 , members of her family .
One woman loses six .
One woman loses her head .
One woman searches rubble . One woman feeds on trash .
One woman shoots her face . One woman shoots her husband .
One woman straps herself .
One woman gives birth to a baby .
One woman gives birth to borders .
One woman no longer believes love will ever find her .
One woman never did .
Where do refugee hearts go ?
Broken , dissed , placed where theyre not from , dont want to be missed .
Faced with absence .
We mourn each one or we mean nothing at all .
My spine curves spiral .
Precipice running to and running from human beings .
Cluster bombs left behind .
De facto landmines .
A smoldering grief .
Harvest contaminated tobacco .
Harvest bombs .
Harvest baby teeth .
Harvest palms , smoke .
Harvest witness , smoke .
Resolutions , smoke .
Salvation , smoke .
Redemption , smoke .
Breathe .
Do not fear what has blown up .
If you must , fear the unexploded .
Thank you .
Saul Griffith : High - altitude wind energy from kites !
In this brief talk , Saul Griffith unveils the invention his new company Makani Power has been working on : giant kite turbines that create surprising amounts of clean , renewable energy .
If youre at all like me , this is what you do with the sunny summer weekends in San Francisco : you build experimental kite - powered hydrofoils capable of more than 30 knots .
And you realize that there is incredible power in the wind , and it can do amazing things .
And one day , a vessel not unlike this will probably break the world speed record .
But kites arent just toys like this .
Kites : Im going to give you a brief history , and tell you about the magnificent future of every childs favorite plaything .
So , kites are more than a thousand years old , and the Chinese used them for military applications , and even for lifting men .
So they knew at that stage they could carry large weights .
Im not sure why there is a hole in this particular man .
In 1827 , a fellow called George Pocock actually pioneered the use of kites for towing buggies in races against horse carriages across the English countryside .
Then of course , at the dawn of aviation , all of the great inventors of the time  -  -  like Hargreaves , like Langley , even Alexander Graham Bell , inventor of the telephone , who was flying this kite  -  -  were doing so in the pursuit of aviation .
Then these two fellows came along , and they were flying kites to develop the control systems that would ultimately enable powered human flight .
So this is of course Orville and Wilbur Wright , and the Wright Flyer .
And their experiments with kites led to this momentous occasion , where we powered up and took off for the first - ever 12 - second human flight .
And that was fantastic for the future of commercial aviation .
But unfortunately , it relegated kites once again to be considered childrens toys .
That was until the 1970s , where we had the last energy crisis .
And a fabulous man called Miles Loyd who lives on the outskirts of San Francisco , wrote this seminal paper that was completely ignored in the Journal of Energy about how to use basically an airplane on a piece of string to generate enormous amounts of electricity .
The real key observation he made is that a free - flying wing can sweep through more sky and generate more power in a unit of time than a fixed - wing turbine .
So turbines grew . And they can now span up to three hundred feet at the hub height , but they cant really go a lot higher , and more height is where the more wind is , and more power  -  -  as much as twice as much .
So cut to now . We still have an energy crisis , and now we have a climate crisis as well . You know , so humans generate about 12 trillion watts , or 12 terawatts , from fossil fuels .
And Al Gore has spoken to why we need to hit one of these targets , and in reality what that means is in the next 30 to 40 years , we have to make 10 trillion watts or more of new clean energy somehow .
Wind is the second - largest renewable resource after solar : 3600 terawatts , more than enough to supply humanity 200 times over .
The majority of it is in the higher altitudes , above 300 feet , where we dont have a technology as yet to get there .
So this is the dawn of the new age of kites .
This is our test site on Maui , flying across the sky .
Im now going to show you the first autonomous generation of power by every childs favorite plaything .
As you can tell , you need to be a robot to fly this thing for thousands of hours .
It makes you a little nauseous .
And here were actually generating about 10 kilowatts  -  -  so , enough to power probably five United States households  -  -  with a kite not much larger than this piano .
And the real significant thing here is were developing the control systems , as did the Wright brothers , that would enable sustained , long - duration flight .
And it doesnt hurt to do it in a location like this either .
So this is the equivalent for a kite flier of peeing in the snow  -  -  thats tracing your name in the sky .
And this is where were actually going .
So were beyond the 12 - second steps .
And were working towards megawatt - scale machines that fly at 2000 feet and generate tons of clean electricity .
So you ask , how big are those machines ?
Well , this paper plane would be maybe a  -  -  oop !
That would be enough to power your cell phone .
Your Cessna would be 230 killowatts .
If youd loan me your Gulfstream , Ill rip its wings off and generate you a megawatt .
If you give me a 747 , Ill make six megawatts , which is more than the largest wind turbines today .
And the Spruce Goose would be a 15 - megawatt wing .
So that is audacious , you say . I agree .
But audacious is what has happened many times before in history .
This is a refrigerator factory , churning out airplanes for World War II .
Prior to World War II , they were making 1000 planes a year .
By 1945 , they were making 100,000 .
With this factory and 100,000 planes a year , we could make all of Americas electricity in about 10 years .
So really this is a story about the audacious plans of young people with these dreams . There are many of us .
I am lucky enough to work with 30 of them .
And I think we need to support all of the dreams of the kids out there doing these crazy things .
Thank you .
Matthieu Ricard : The habits of happiness
What is happiness , and how can we all get some ? Biochemist turned Buddhist monk Matthieu Ricard says we can train our minds in habits of well - being , to generate a true sense of serenity and fulfillment .
So , I guess it is a result of globalization that you can find Coca - Cola tins on top of Everest and a Buddhist monk in Monterey .
And so I just came , two days ago , from the Himalayas to your kind invitation .
So I would like to invite you , also , for a while , to the Himalayas themselves .
And to show the place where meditators , like me , who began with being a molecular biologist in Pasteur Institute , and found their way to the mountains .
So these are a few images I was lucky to take and be there .
Theres the Mount Kailash in Eastern Tibet  -  -  wonderful setting .
This is from Marlboro country .
This is a turquoise lake .
A meditator .
This is the hottest day of the year somewhere in Eastern Tibet , on August 1 .
And the night before , we camped , and my Tibetan friends said ,  We are going to sleep outside .  And I said ,  Why ? We have enough space in the tent . 
They said ,  Yes , but its summertime . 
So now , we are going to speak of happiness .
As a Frenchman , I must say that there are a lot of French intellectuals that think happiness is not at all interesting .
I just wrote an essay on happiness , and there was a controversy .
And someone wrote an article saying ,  Dont impose on us the dirty work of happiness . 
 We dont care about being happy . We need to live with passion .
We like the ups and downs of life .
We like our suffering because its so good when it ceases for a while . 
This is what I see from the balcony of my hermitage in the Himalayas .
Its about two meters by three , and you are all welcome any time .
Now , lets come to happiness or well - being .
And first of all , you know , despite what the French intellectuals say , it seems that no one wakes up in the morning thinking ,  May I suffer the whole day ? 
Which means that somehow  -  -  consciously or not , directly or indirectly , in the short or the long term , whatever we do , whatever we hope , whatever we dream  -  -  somehow , is related to a deep , profound desire for well - being or happiness .
As Pascal said , even the one who hangs himself , somehow , is looking for cessation of suffering  -  -  he finds no other way .
But then , if you look in the literature , East and West , you can find incredible diversity of definition of happiness .
Some people say , I only believed in remembering the past , imagining the future , never the present .
Some people say happiness is right now ; its the quality of the freshness of the present moment .
And that led to Henri Bergson , the French philosopher , to say ,  All the great thinkers of humanity have left happiness in the vague so that they could define  -  -  each of them could define their own terms . 
Well , that would be fine if it was just a secondary preoccupation in life .
But now , if it is something that is going to determine the quality of every instant of our life , then we better know what it is , have some clearer idea .
And probably , the fact that we dont know that is why , so often , although we seek happiness , it seems we turn our back to it .
Although we want to avoid suffering , it seems we are running somewhat towards it .
And that can also come from some kind of confusions .
One of the most common ones is happiness and pleasure .
But , if you look at the characteristics of those two , pleasure is contingent upon time , upon its object , upon the place .
It is something that  -  -  changes of nature .
Beautiful chocolate cake : first serving is delicious , second one not so much , then we feel disgust .
Thats the nature of things . We get tired .
I used to be a fan of Bach . I used to play it on the guitar , you know .
I can hear it two , three , five times .
If I had to hear it 24 hours , non - stop , it might be very tiring .
If you are feeling very cold , you come near a fire , its so wonderful .
Then , after some moments , you just go a little back , and then it starts burning .
It sort of uses itself as you experience it .
And also , again , it can  -  -  also , its something that you  -  -  it is not something that is radiating outside .
Like , you can feel intense pleasure and some others around you can be suffering a lot .
Now , what , then , will be happiness ?
And happiness , of course , is such a vague word , so lets say well - being .
And so , I think the best definition , according to the Buddhist view , is that well - being is not just a mere pleasurable sensation .
It is a deep sense of serenity and fulfillment , a state that actually pervades and underlies all emotional states , and all the joys and sorrows that can come ones way .
For you , that might be surprising .
Can we have this kind of well - being while being sad ? In a way , why not ?
Because we are speaking of a different level .
Look at the waves coming here to shore .
When you are at the bottom of the wave , you hit the bottom .
You hit the solid rock .
When you are surfing on the top , you are all elated .
So you go from elation to depression  -  -  theres no depth .
Now , if you look at the high sea , there might be beautiful , calm ocean , like a mirror .
There might be storms , but the depth of the ocean is still there , unchanged .
So now , how is that ?
It can only be a state of being , not just a fleeting emotion , sensation .
Even joy  -  -  that can be the spring of happiness .
But theres also wicked joy , you can rejoice in someones suffering .
So how do we proceed in our quest for happiness ? Very often , we look outside .
We think that if we could gather this and that , all the conditions , something that we say ,  Everything to be happy  -  -  to have everything to be happy . 
That very sentence already reveals the doom of destruction of happiness .
To have everything . If we miss something , it collapses .
And also , when things go wrong , we try to fix the outside so much , but our control of the outer world is limited , temporary , and often , illusory .
So now , look at inner conditions . Arent they stronger ?
Isnt it the mind that translates the outer condition into happiness and suffering ?
And isnt that stronger ?
We know , by experience , that we can be what we call  a little paradise ,  and yet , be completely unhappy within .
The Dalai Lama was once in Portugal , and there was a lot of construction going on everywhere .
So one evening , he said ,  Look , you are doing all these things , but isnt it nice , also , to build something within ? 
And he said ,  Unless that  -  -  even you get high - tech flat on the 100th floor of a super - modern and comfortable building , if you are deeply unhappy within , all you are going to look for is a window from which to jump . 
So now , at the opposite , we know a lot of people who , in very difficult circumstances , manage to keep serenity , inner strength , inner freedom , confidence .
So now , if the inner conditions are stronger  -  -  of course , the outer conditions do influence , and its wonderful to live longer , healthier , to have access to information , education , to be able to travel , to have freedom . Its highly desirable .
However , this is not enough . Those are just auxiliary , help conditions .
The experience that translates everything is within the mind .
So then , when we ask oneself how to nurture the condition for happiness , the inner conditions , and which are those which will undermine happiness .
So then , this just needs to have some experience .
We have to know from ourselves , there are certain states of mind that are conducive to this flourishing , to this well - being , what the Greeks called eudaimonia , flourishing .
There are some which are adverse to this well - being .
And so , if we look from our own experience , anger , hatred , jealousy , arrogance , obsessive desire , strong grasping , they dont leave us in such a good state after we have experienced it .
And also , they are detrimental to others happiness .
So we may consider that the more those are invading our mind , and , like a chain reaction , the more we feel miserable , we feel tormented .
At the opposite , everyone knows deep within that an act of selfless generosity , if from the distance , without anyone knowing anything about it , we could save a childs life , make someone happy .
We dont need the recognition . We dont need any gratitude .
Just the mere fact of doing that fills such a sense of adequation with our deep nature .
And we would like to be like that all the time .
So is that possible , to change our way of being , to transform ones mind ?
Arent those negative emotions , or destructive emotions , inherent to the nature of mind ?
Is change possible in our emotions , in our traits , in our moods ?
For that we have to ask , what is nature of mind ?
And if we look from the experiential point of view , there is a primary quality of consciousness thats just the mere fact to be cognitive , to be aware .
Consciousness is like a mirror that allows all images to rise on it .
You can have ugly faces , beautiful faces in the mirror .
The mirror allows that , but the mirror is not tainted , is not modified , is not altered by those images .
Likewise , behind every single thought there is the bare consciousness , pure awareness .
This is the nature . It can not be tainted intrinsically with hatred or jealousy because , then , if it was always there  -  -  like a dye that would permeate the whole cloth  -  -  then it would be found all the time , somewhere .
We know were not always angry , always jealous , always generous .
So , because the basic fabric of consciousness is this pure cognitive quality that differentiates it from a stone , there is a possibility for change because all emotions are fleeting .
That is the ground for mind training .
Mind training is based on the idea that two opposite mental factors can not happen at the same time .
You could go from love to hate .
But you can not , at the same time , toward the same object , the same person , want to harm and want to do good .
You can not , in the same gesture , shake hand and give a blow .
So , there are natural antidotes to emotions that are destructive to our inner well - being .
So thats the way to proceed . Rejoicing compared to jealousy .
A kind of sense of inner freedom as opposite to intense grasping and obsession .
Benevolence , loving kindness against hatred .
But , of course , each emotion then would need a particular antidote .
Another way is to try to find a general antidote to all emotions , and thats by looking at the very nature .
Usually , when we feel annoyed , hatred or upset with someone , or obsessed with something , the mind goes again and again to that object .
Each time it goes to the object , it reinforces that obsession or that annoyance .
So then , its a self - perpetuating process .
So what we need to look now is , instead of looking outward , we look inward .
Look at anger itself .
It looks very menacing , like a billowing monsoon cloud or thunderstorm .
But we think we could sit on the cloud  -  -  but if you go there , its just mist .
Likewise , if you look at the thought of anger , it will vanish like frost under the morning sun .
If you do this again and again , the propensity , the tendencies for anger to arise again will be less and less each time you dissolve it .
And , at the end , although it may rise , it will just cross the mind , like a bird crossing the sky without leaving any track .
So this is the principal of mind training .
Now , it takes time because we  -  -  it took time for all those faults in our mind , the tendencies , to build up , so it will take time to unfold them as well .
But thats the only way to go .
Mind transformation  -  -  that is the very meaning of meditation .
It means familiarization with a new way of being , new way of perceiving things , which is more in adequation with reality , with interdependence , with the stream and continuous transformation , which our being and our consciousness is .
So , the interface with cognitive science , since we need to come to that , and it was , I suppose , the subject of  -  -  we have to deal in such a short time with brain plasticity . The brain was thought to be more or less fixed .
All the nominal connections , in numbers and quantities , were thought  -  -  until the last 20 years  -  -  thought to be more or less fixed when we reached adult age .
Now , recently , it has been found that it can change a lot .
A violinist , as we heard , who has done 10,000 hours of violin practice , some area that controls the movements of fingers in the brain change a lot , increasing reinforcement of the synaptic connections .
So can we do that with human qualities ?
With loving kindness , with patience , with openness ?
So thats what those great meditators have been doing .
Some of them who came to the labs , like in Madison , Wisconsin , or in Berkeley , did 20 to 40,000 hours of meditation .
They do , like , three years retreat , where they do meditate 12 hours a day .
And then , the rest of their life , they will do that three or four hours a day .
They are real Olympic champions of mind training .
This is the place where the meditators  -  -  you can see its kind of inspiring .
Now , here with 256 electrodes .
So what did they find ? Of course , same thing .
The scientific embargo  -  -  if ever has been to submitted to  Nature ,  hopefully , it will be accepted .
It deals with the state of compassion , unconditional compassion .
We asked meditators , who have been doing that for years and years and years , to put their mind in a state where theres nothing but loving kindness , total availability to sentient being .
Of course , during the training , we do that with objects .
We think of people suffering , we think of people we love , but at some point , it can be a state which is all pervading .
Here is the preliminary result , which I can show because its already been shown .
The bell curve shows 150 controls , and what is being looked at is the difference between the right and the left frontal lobe .
In very short , people who have more activity in the right side of the prefrontal cortex are more depressed , withdrawn . They dont describe a lot of positive affect .
Its the opposite on the left side : more tendency to altruism , to happiness , to express , and curiosity and so forth .
So theres a basic line for people . And also , it can be changed .
If you see a comic movie , you go off to the left side .
If you are happy about something , youll go more to the left side .
If you have a bout of depression , youll go to the right side .
Here , the  - 0.5 is the full standard deviation of a meditator who meditated on compassion .
Its something that is totally out of the bell curve .
So , Ive no time to go into all the different scientific results .
Hopefully , they will come .
But they found that  -  -  this is after three and a half hours in an fMRI , its like coming out of a space ship .
Also , it has been shown in other labs  -  -  for instance , Paul Ekmans labs in Berkeley  -  -  that some meditators are able , also , to control their emotional response more than it could be thought .
Like the startle experiments , for example .
If you sit a guy on a chair with all this kind of apparatus measuring your physiology , and theres kind of a bomb that goes off , its so instinctive response that , in 20 years , they never saw anyone who will not jump .
Some meditators , without trying to stop it , but simply by being completely open , thinking that that bang is just going to be just a small event like a shooting star , they are able not to move at all .
So the whole point of that is not , sort of , to make , like , a circus thing of showing exceptional beings who can jump , or whatever .
Its more to say that mind training matters . That this is not just a luxury .
This is not a supplementary vitamin for the soul .
This is something thats going to determine the quality of every instant of our lives .
We are ready to spend 15 years achieving education .
We love to do jogging , fitness .
We do all kinds of things to remain beautiful .
Yet , we spend surprisingly little time taking care of what matters most  -  -  the way our mind functions  -  -  which , again , is the ultimate thing that determines the quality of our experience .
Now , our compassion is supposed to be put in action .
Thats what we try to do in different places .
Just this one example is worth a lot of work .
This lady with bone TB , left alone in a tent , is going to die with her only daughter .
One year later , how she is .
Different schools and clinics weve been doing in Tibet .
And just , I leave you with the beauty of those looks that tells more about happiness than I could ever say .
And jumping monks of Tibet .
Flying monks .
Thank you very much .
Ariel Garten : Know thyself , with a brain scanner
Imagine playing a video game controlled by your mind . Now imagine that game also teaches you about your own patterns of stress , relaxation and focus . Ariel Garten shows how looking at our own brain activity gives new meaning to the ancient dictum  know thyself .
The maxim ,  Know thyself  has been around since the ancient Greeks .
Some attribute this golden world knowledge to Plato , others to Pythagoras .
But the truth is it doesnt really matter which sage said it first , because its still sage advice , even today .
 Know thyself . 
Its pithy almost to the point of being meaningless , but it rings familiar and true , doesnt it ?
 Know thyself . 
I understand this timeless dictum as a statement about the problems , or more exactly the confusions , of consciousness .
Ive always been fascinated with knowing the self .
This fascination led me to submerge myself in art , study neuroscience and later to become a psychotherapist .
Today I combine all my passions as the CEO of InteraXon , a thought - controlled computing company .
My goal , quite simply , is to help people become more in tune with themselves .
I take it from this little dictum ,  Know thyself . 
If you think about it , this imperative is kind of the defining characteristic of our species , isnt it ?
I mean , its self - awareness that separates Homo sapiens from earlier instances of our mankind .
Today were often too busy tending to our iPhones and iPods to really stop and get to know ourselves .
Under the deluge of minute - to - minute text conversations , emails , relentless exchange of media channels and passwords and apps and reminders and Tweets and tags , we lose sight of what all this fuss is supposed to be about in the first place : ourselves .
Much of the time were transfixed by all of the ways we can reflect ourselves into the world .
And we can barely find the time to reflect deeply back in on our own selves .
Weve cluttered ourselves up with all this .
And we feel like we have to get far , far away to a secluded retreat , leaving it all behind .
So we go far away to the top of a mountain , assuming that perching ourselves on a piece is bound to give us the respite we need to sort the clutter , the chaotic everyday , and find ourselves again .
But on that mountain where we gain that beautiful peace of mind , what are we really achieving ?
Its really only a successful escape .
Think of the term we use ,  Retreat . 
This is the term that armies use when theyve lost a battle .
It means weve got to get out of here .
Is this how we feel about the pressures of our world , that in order to get inside ourselves , you have to run for the hills ?
And the problem with escaping your day - to - day life is that you have to come home eventually .
So when you think about it , were almost like a tourist visiting ourselves over there .
And eventually that vacations got to come to an end .
So my question to you is , can we find ways to know ourselves without the escape ?
Can we redefine our relationship with the technologized world in order to have the heightened sense of self - awareness that we seek ?
Can we live here and now in our wired web and still follow those ancient instructions ,  Know thyself ? 
I say the answer is yes .
And Im here today to share a new way that were working with technology to this end to get familiar with our inner self like never before  -  -  humanizing technology and furthering that age - old quest of ours to more fully know the self .
Its called thought - controlled computing .
You may or may not have noticed that Im wearing a tiny electrode on my forehead .
This is actually a brainwave sensor thats reading the electrical activity of my brain as I give this talk .
These brainwaves are being analyzed and we can see them as a graph .
Let me show you what it looks like .
That blue line there is my brainwave .
Its the direct signal being recorded from my head , rendered in real time .
The green and red bars show that same signal displayed by frequency , with lower frequencies here and higher frequencies up here .
Youre actually looking inside my head as I speak .
These graphs are compelling , theyre undulating , but from a humans perspective , theyre actually not very useful .
Thats why weve spent a lot of time thinking about how to make this data meaningful to the people who use it .
For instance , what if I could use this data to find out how relaxed I am at any moment ?
Or what if I can take that information and put it into an organic shape up on the screen ?
The shape on the right over here has become an indicator of whats going on in my head .
The more relaxed I am , the more the energys going to fall through it .
I may also be interested in knowing how focused I am , so I can put my level of attention into the circuit board on the other side .
And the more focused my brain is , the more the circuit board is going to surge with energy .
Ordinarily , I would have no way of knowing how focused or relaxed I was in any tangible way .
As we know , our feelings about how were feeling are notoriously unreliable .
Weve all had stress creep up on us without even noticing it until we lost it on someone who didnt deserve it , and then we realize that we probably should have checked in with ourselves a little earlier .
This new awareness opens up vast possibilities for applications that help improve our lives and ourselves .
Were trying to create technology that uses the insights to make our work more efficient , our breaks more relaxing and our connections deeper and more fulfilling than ever .
Im going to share some of these visions with you in a bit , but first I want to take a look at how we got here .
By the way , feel free to check in on my head at any time .
My team at InteraXon and I have been developing throught - controlled application for almost a decade now .
In the first phase of development we were really enthused by all the things we could control with our mind .
We were making things activate , light up and work just by thinking .
We were transcending the space between the mind and the device .
We brought to life a vast array of prototypes and products that you could control with your mind , like thought - controlled home appliances or slot car games or video games or a levitating chair .
We created technology and applications that engaged peoples imaginations , and it was really exciting .
And then we were asked to do something really big for the Olympics .
We were invited to create a massive installation at the Vancouver 2010 winter Olympics , were used in Vancouver , got to control the lighting on the C.N . Tower , the Canadian Parliament buildings and Niagara Falls from all the way across the country using their minds .
Over 17 days at the Olympics 7,000 visitors from all over the world actually got to individually control the light from the C.N . Tower , parliament and Niagara in real time with their minds from across the country , 3,000 km away .
So controlling stuff with your mind is pretty cool .
But were always interested in multi - tiered levels of human interaction .
And so we began looking into inventing thought - controlled applications in a more complex frame than just control .
And that was responsiveness .
We realized that we had a system that allowed technology to know something about you .
And it could join into the relationship with you .
We created the responsive room where the lights music and blinds adjusted to your state .
They followed these little shifts in your mental activity .
So as you settled into relaxation at the end of a hard day , on the couch in our office , the music would mellow with you .
When you read , the desk lamp would get brighter .
If you nod off , the system would know , dimming to darkness as you do .
We then realized that if technology could know something about you and use it to help you , theres an even more valuable application than that .
That you could know something about yourself .
We could know sides of ourselves that were all but invisible and come to see things that were previously hidden .
Let me show you an example of what Im talking about here .
Heres an application that I created for the IPad .
So the goal of the original game Zen Bound is to wrap a rope around a wooden form .
So you use it with your headset .
The headset connects wirelessly to an IPad or a smartphone .
In that headset you have fabric sensors on your forehead and above the ear .
In the original Zen Bound game , you play it by scrolling your fingers over the pad .
In the game that we created , of course , you control the wooden form thats on the screen there with your mind .
As you focus on the wooden form , it rotates .
The more you focus , the faster the rotation .
This is for real .
This is not a fake .
Whats really interesting to me though is at the end of the game you get stats and feedback about how you did .
You have graphs and charts that tell you how your brain was doing  -  -  not just how much rope you used or what your high score is , but what was going on inside of your mind .
And this is valuable feedback that we can use to understand whats going on inside of ourselves .
I like to call this  intra - active . 
Normally we think about technology as interactive .
This technology is intra - active .
It understands whats inside of you and builds a sort of responsive relationship between you and your technology so that you can use this information to move you forward .
So you can use this information to understand you in a responsive loop .
At InteraXon , intra - active technology is one of our really defining mandates .
Its how we understand the world inside and reflect it outside into this tight loop .
For example , thought - controlled computing can teach children with ADD how to improve their focus .
With ADD , children have a low proportion of beta waves for focus states and a high proportion of theta states .
So you can create applications that reward focused brain states .
So you can imagine kids playing video games with their brain waves and improving their ADD symptoms as they do it .
This can be as effective as Ritalin .
Perhaps even more importantly , thought - controlled computing can give children with ADD insights into their own fluctuating mental states , so they can better understand themselves and their learning needs .
The way these children will be able to use their new awareness to improve themselves will upend many of the damaging and widespread social stigmas that people who are diagnosed as different are challenged with .
We can peer inside our heads and interact with what was once locked away from us , what once mystified and separated us .
Brainwave technology can understand us , anticipate our emotions and find the best solutions for our needs .
Imagine this collected awareness of the individual computed and reflected across an entire lifespan .
Imagine the insights that you can gain from this kind of second sight .
It would be like plugging into your own personal Google .
On the subject of Google , today you can search and tag images based on the thoughts and feelings you had while you watched them .
You can tag pictures of baby animals as happy , or whatever baby animals are to you , and then you can search that database , navigating with your feelings , rather than the keywords that just hint at them .
Or you could tag Facebook photos with the emotions that you had associated with those memories and then instantly prioritize the streams that catch your attention , just like this .
Humanizing technology is about taking whats already natural about the human - tech experience and building technology seamlessly in tandem with it .
As it aligns with our human behaviors , it can allow us to make better sense of what we do and , more importantly , why , creating a big picture out of all the important little details that make up who we are .
With humanized technology we can monitor the quality of your sleep cycles .
When our productivity starts to slacken , we can go back to that data and see how we can make more effective balance between work and play .
Do you know what causes fatigue in you or what brings out your energetic self , what triggers cause you to be depressed or what fun things are going to bring you out of that funk ?
Imagine if you had access to data that allowed you to rank on a scale of overall happiness which people in your life made you the happiest , or what activities brought you joy .
Would you make more time for those people ? Would you prioritize ?
Would you get a divorce ?
What thought - controlled computing can allow you to do is build colorful layered pictures of our lives .
And with this , we can get the skinny on our psychological happenings and build a story of our behaviors over time .
We can begin to see the underlying narratives that propel us forward and tell us about whats going on .
And from this , we can learn how to change the plot , the outcome and the character of our personal stories .
Two millennia ago , those Greeks had some powerful insights .
They knew that a fundamental piece falls into place when you start to live out their little phrase , when you come into contact with yourself .
They understood the power of human narrative and the value that we place on humans as changing , evolving and growing .
But they understood something more fundamental  -  -  the sheer joy in discovery , the delight and fascination that we get from the world and being ourselves in it , the richness that we get from seeing , feeling and knowing the lives that we are .
My moms an artist , and as a child Id often see her bring things to life with the stroke of a brush .
One moment it was all white space , pure possibility .
The next , it was alive with her colorful ideas and expressions .
As I sat easel - side , watching her transform canvas after canvas , I learned that you could create your own world .
I learned that our own inner worlds  -  -  our ideas , emotions and imaginations  -  -  were , in fact , not bound by our brains and bodies .
If you could think it , if you could discover it , you could bring it to life .
To me , thought - controlled computing is as simple and powerful as a paintbrush  -  -  one more tool to unlock and enliven the hidden worlds within us .
I look forward to the day that I can sit beside you , easel - side , watching the world that we can create with our new toolboxes and the discoveries that we can make about ourselves .
Thank you .
Graham Hill : Less stuff , more happiness
Writer and designer Graham Hill asks : Can having less stuff , in less room , lead to more happiness ? He makes the case for taking up less space , and lays out three rules for editing your life .
Whats in the box ?
Whatever it is must be pretty important , because Ive traveled with it , moved it , from apartment to apartment to apartment .
Sound familiar ?
Did you know that we Americans have about three times the amount of space we did 50 years ago ?
Three times .
So youd think , with all this extra space , wed have plenty of room for all our stuff .
Nope .
Theres a new industry in town , a 22 billion - dollar , 2.2 billion sq . ft . industry : that of personal storage .
So weve got triple the space , but weve become such good shoppers that we need even more space .
So where does this lead ?
Lots of credit card debt , huge environmental footprints , and perhaps not coincidentally , our happiness levels flat - lined over the same 50 years .
Well Im here to suggest theres a better way , that less might actually equal more .
I bet most of us have experienced at some point the joys of less : college  -  -  in your dorm , traveling  -  -  in a hotel room , camping  -  -  rig up basically nothing , maybe a boat .
Whatever it was for you , I bet that , among other things , this gave you a little more freedom , a little more time .
So Im going to suggest that less stuff and less space are going to equal a smaller footprint .
Its actually a great way to save you some money .
And its going to give you a little more ease in your life .
So I started a project called Life Edited at lifeedited . org to further this conversation and to find some great solutions in this area .
First up : crowd - sourcing my 420 sq . ft . apartment in Manhattan with partners Mutopo and Jovoto.com .
I wanted it all  -  -  home office , sit down dinner for 10 , room for guests , and all my kite surfing gear .
With over 300 entries from around the world , I got it , my own little jewel box .
By buying a space that was 420 sq. ft .
instead of 600 , immediately Im saving 200 grand .
Smaller space is going to make for smaller utilities  -  -  save some more money there , but also a smaller footprint .
And because its really designed around an edited set of possessions  -  -  my favorite stuff  -  -  and really designed for me , Im really excited to be there .
So how can you live little ?
Three main approaches .
First of all , you have to edit ruthlessly .
Weve got to clear the arteries of our lives .
And that shirt that I hadnt worn in years ?
Its time for me to let it go .
Weve got to cut the extraneous out of our lives , and weve got to learn to stem the inflow .
We need to think before we buy .
Ask ourselves ,  Is that really going to make me happier ? Truly ? 
By all means , we should buy and own some great stuff .
But we want stuff that were going to love for years , not just stuff .
Secondly , our new mantra : small is sexy .
We want space efficiency .
We want things that are designed for how theyre used the vast majority of the time , not that rare event .
Why have a six burner stove when you rarely use three ?
So we want things that nest , we want things that stack , and we want it digitized .
You can take paperwork , books , movies , and you can make it disappear  -  -  its magic .
Finally , we want multifunctional spaces and housewares  -  -  a sink combined with a toilet , a dining table becomes a bed  -  -  same space , a little side table stretches out to seat 10 .
In the winning Life Edited scheme in a render here , we combine a moving wall with transformer furniture to get a lot out of the space .
Look at the coffee table  -  -  it grows in height and width to seat 10 .
My office folds away , easily hidden .
My bed just pops out of the wall with two fingers .
Guests ? Move the moving wall , have some fold - down guest beds .
And of course , my own movie theater .
So Im not saying that we all need to live in 420 sq. ft .
But consider the benefits of an edited life .
Go from 3,000 to 2,000 , from 1,500 to 1,000 .
Most of us , maybe all of us , are here pretty happily for a bunch of days with a couple of bags , maybe a small space , a hotel room .
So when you go home and you walk through your front door , take a second and ask yourselves ,  Could I do with a little life editing ?
Would that give me a little more freedom ?
Maybe a little more time ? 
Whats in the box ?
It doesnt really matter .
I know I dont need it .
Whats in yours ?
Maybe , just maybe , less might equal more .
So lets make room for the good stuff .
Thank you .
Hans Rosling : Asias rise  -  -  how and when
Hans Rosling was a young guest student in India when he first realized that Asia had all the capacities to reclaim its place as the worlds dominant economic force . At TEDIndia , he graphs global economic growth since 1858 and predicts the exact date that India and China will outstrip the US .
Once upon a time , at the age of 24 , I was a student at St . Johns Medical College in Bangalore .
I was a guest student during one month of a public health course .
And that changed my mindset forever .
The course was good , but it was not the course content in itself that changed the mindset .
It was the brutal realization , the first morning , that the Indian students were better than me .
You see , I was a study nerd .
I loved statistics from a young age .
And I studied very much in Sweden .
I used to be in the upper quarter of all courses I attended .
But in St . Johns , I was in the lower quarter .
And the fact was that Indian students studied harder than we did in Sweden .
They read the textbook twice , or three times or four times .
In Sweden we read it once and then we went partying .
And that , to me , that personal experience was the first time in my life that the mindset I grew up with was changed .
And I realized that perhaps the Western world will not continue to dominate the world forever .
And I think many of you have the same sort of personal experience .
Its that realization of someone you meet that really made you change your ideas about the world .
Its not the statistics , although I tried to make it funny .
And I will now , here , onstage , try to predict when that will happen  -  -  that Asia will regain its dominant position as the leading part of the world , as it used to be , over thousands of years .
And I will do that by trying to predict precisely at what year the average income per person in India , in China , will reach that of the West .
And I dont mean the whole economy , because to grow an economy of India to the size of U.K .  -  -  thats a piece of cake , with one billion people .
But I want to see when will the average pay , the money for each person , per month , in India and China , when will that have reached that of U.K . and the United States ?
But I will start with a historical background .
And you can see my map if I get it up here . You know ?
I will start at 1858 .
1858 was a year of great technological advancement in the West .
That was the year when Queen Victoria was able , for the first time , to communicate with President Buchanan , through the Transatlantic Telegraphic Cable .
And they were the first to  Twitter  transatlantically .
And Ive been able , through this wonderful Google and Internet , to find the text of the telegram sent back from President Buchanan to Queen Victoria .
And it ends like this :  This telegraph is a fantastic instrument to diffuse religion , civilization , liberty and law throughout the world . 
Those are nice words . But I got sort of curious of what he meant with liberty , and liberty for whom .
And we will think about that when we look at the wider picture of the world in 1858 .
Because 1858 was also watershed year in the history of Asia .
1858 was the year when the courageous uprising against the foreign occupation of India was defeated by the British forces .
And India was up to 89 years more of foreign domination .
1858 in China was the victory in the Opium War by the British forces .
And that meant that foreigners , as it said in the treaty , were allowed to trade freely in China .
It meant paying with opium for Chinese goods .
And 1858 in Japan was the year when Japan had to sign the Harris Treaty and accept trade on favorable condition for the U.S .
And they were threatened by those black ships there , that had been in Tokyo harbor over the last year .
But , Japan , in contrast to India and China , maintained its national sovereignty .
And lets see how much difference that can make .
And I will do that by bringing these bubbles back to a Gapminder graph here , where you can see each bubble is a country .
The size of the bubble here is the population .
On this axis , as I used to have income per person in comparable dollar .
And on that axis I have life expectancy , the health of people .
And I also bring an innovation here .
I have transformed the laser beam into an ecological , recyclable version here , in green India .
And we will see , you know .
Look here , 1858 , India was here , China was here , Japan was there , United States and United Kingdom was richer over there .
And I will start the world like this .
India was not always like this level .
Actually if we go back into the historical record , there was a time hundreds of years ago when the income per person in India and China was even above that of Europe .
But 1850 had already been many , many years of foreign domination , and India had been de - industrialized .
And you can see that the countries who were growing their economy was United States and United Kingdom .
And they were also , by the end of the century , getting healthy , and Japan was starting to catch up .
India was trying down here .
Can you see how it starts to move there ?
But really , really natural sovereignty was good for Japan .
And Japan is trying to move up there .
And its the new century now . Health is getting better , United Kingdom , United States .
But careful now  -  -  we are approaching the First World War .
And the First World War , you know , well see a lot of deaths and economical problems here .
United Kingdom is going down .
And now comes the Spanish flu also .
And then after the First World War , they continue up .
Still under foreign domination , and without sovereignty , India and China are down in the corner .
Not much has happened .
They have grown their population but not much more .
In the 1930s now , you can see that Japan is going to a period of war , with lower life expectancy .
And the Second World War was really a terrible event , also economically for Japan .
But they did recover quite fast afterwards .
And we are moving into the new world .
In 1947 India finally gained its independence .
And they could raise the Indian flag and become a sovereign nation , but in very big difficulties down there .
In 1949 we saw the emergence of the modern China in a way which surprised the world .
And what happened ?
What happens in the after independence ?
You can see that the health started to improve .
Children started to go to school .
Health services were provided .
This is the Great Leap Forward , when China fell down .
It was central planning by Mao Tse Tung .
China recovered . Then they said ,  Nevermore , stupid central planning . 
But they went up here , and India was trying to follow .
And they were catching up indeed .
And both countries had the better health , but still a very low economy .
And we came to 1978 , and Mao Tse Tung died , and a new guy turned up from the left .
And it was Deng Xiaoping coming out here .
And he said ,  Doesnt matter if a cat is white or black , as long as it catches mice . 
Because catching mice is what the two cats wanted to do .
And you can see the two cats being here , China and India , wanting to catch the mices over there , you know .
And they decided to go not only for health and education , but also starting to grow their economy .
And the market reformer was successful there .
In 92 India follows with a market reform .
And they go quite closely together , and you can see that the similarity with India and China , in many ways , are greater than the differences with them .
And here they march on . And will they catch up ?
This is the big question today .
There they are today .
Now what does it mean that the  -  -  the averages there  -  -  this is the average of China .
If I would split China , look here , Shanghai has already catched up .
Shanghai is already there .
And its healthier than the United States .
But on the other hand , Guizhou , one of the poorest inland provinces of China , is there .
And if I split Guizhou into urban and rural , the rural part of Guizhou goes down there .
You see this enormous inequity in China , in the midst of fast economic growth .
And if I would also look at India , you have another type of inequity , actually , in India .
The geographical , macro - geographical difference is not so big .
Uttar Pradesh , the biggest of the states here , is poorer and has a lower health than the rest of India .
Kerala is flying on top there , matching United States in health , but not in economy .
And here , Maharashtra , with Mumbai , is forging forward .
Now in India , the big inequities are within the state , rather than between the states .
And that is not a bad thing , in itself .
If you have a lot inequity , macro - geographical inequities can be more difficult in the long term to deal with , than if it is in the same area where you have a growth center relatively close to where poor people are living .
No , there is one more inequity . Look there , United States .
Oh , they broke my frame .
Washington , D.C . went out here .
My friends at Gapminder wanted me to show this because there is a new leader in Washington who is really concerned about the health system .
And I can understand him , because Washington , D.C .
is so rich over there but they are not as healthy as Kerala .
Its quite interesting , isnt it ?
I can see a business opportunity for Kerala , helping fix the health system in the United States .
Now here we have the whole world . You have the legend down there .
And when you see the two giant cats here , pushing forward , you see that in between them and ahead of them , is the whole emerging economies of the world , which Thomas Friedman so correctly called the  flat world . 
You can see that in health and education , a large part of the world population is putting forward , but in Africa , and other parts , as in rural Guizhou in China , there is still people with low health and very low economy .
We have an enormous disparity in the world .
But most of the world in the middle are pushing forwards very fast .
Now , back to my projections .
When will it catch up ? I have to go back to very conventional graph .
I will show income per person on this axis instead , poor down here , rich up there .
And then time here , from 1858 I start the world .
And we shall see what will happen with these countries .
You see , China under foreign domination actually lowered their income and came down to the Indian level here .
Whereas U.K . and United States is getting richer and richer .
And after Second World War , United States is richer than U.K .
But independence is coming here .
Growth is starting , economic reform .
Growth is faster , and with projection from IMF you can see where you expect them to be in 2014 .
Now , the question is ,  When will the catch up take place ? 
Look at , look at the United States .
Can you see the bubble ?
The bubbles , not my bubbles , but the financial bubbles .
Thats the dot com bubble . This is the Lehman Brothers doorstep there .
You see it came down there .
And it seems this is another rock coming down there , you know .
So they doesnt seem to go this way , these countries .
They seem to go in a more humble growth way , you know .
And people interested in growth are turning their eyes towards Asia .
I can compare to Japan . This is Japan coming up .
You see , Japan did it like that .
We add Japan to it .
And there is no doubt that fast catch up can take place .
Can you see here what Japan did ?
Japan did it like this , until full catch up , and then they follow with the other high - income economies .
But the real projections for those ones , I would like to give it like this .
Can be worse , can be better .
Its always difficult to predict , especially about the future .
Now , a historian tells me its even more difficult to predict about the past .
I think Im in a difficult position here .
Inequalities in China and India I consider really the big obstacle because to bring the entire population into growth and prosperity is what will create a domestic market , what will avoid social instability , and which will make use of the entire capacity of the population .
So , social investments in health , education and infrastructure , and electricity is really what is needed in India and China .
You know the climate . We have great international experts within India telling us that the climate is changing , and actions has to be taken , otherwise China and India would be the countries most to suffer from climate change .
And I consider India and China the best partners in the world in a good global climate policy .
But they aint going to pay for what others , who have more money , have largely created , and I can agree on that .
But what Im really worried about is war .
Will the former rich countries really accept a completely changed world economy , and a shift of power away from where it has been the last 50 to 100 to 150 years , back to Asia ?
And will Asia be able to handle that new position of being in charge of being the most mighty , and the governors of the world ?
So , always avoid war , because that always pushes human beings backward .
Now if these inequalities , climate and war can be avoided , get ready for a world in equity , because this is what seems to be happening .
And that vision that I got as a young student , 1972 , that Indians can be much better than Swedes , is just about to happen .
And it will happen precisely the year 2048 in the later part of the summer , in July , more precisely , the 27th of July .
The 27th of July , 2048 is my 100th birthday .
And I expect to speak in the first session of the 39th TED India .
Get your bookings in time . Thank you very much .
Carl Schoonover : How to look inside the brain
There have been remarkable advances in understanding the brain , but how do you actually study the neurons inside it ? Using gorgeous imagery , neuroscientist and TED Fellow Carl Schoonover shows the tools that let us see inside our brains .
This is a thousand - year - old drawing of the brain .
Its a diagram of the visual system .
And some things look very familiar today .
Two eyes at the bottom , optic nerve flowing out from the back .
Theres a very large nose that doesnt seem to be connected to anything in particular .
And if we compare this to more recent representations of the visual system , youll see that things have gotten substantially more complicated over the intervening thousand years .
And thats because today we can see whats inside of the brain , rather than just looking at its overall shape .
Imagine you wanted to understand how a computer works and all you could see was a keyboard , a mouse , a screen .
You really would be kind of out of luck .
You want to be able to open it up , crack it open , look at the wiring inside .
And up until a little more than a century ago , nobody was able to do that with the brain .
Nobody had had a glimpse of the brains wiring .
And thats because if you take a brain out of the skull and you cut a thin slice of it , put it under even a very powerful microscope , theres nothing there .
Its gray , formless .
Theres no structure . It wont tell you anything .
And this all changed in the late 19th century .
Suddenly , new chemical stains for brain tissue were developed and they gave us our first glimpses at brain wiring .
The computer was cracked open .
So what really launched modern neuroscience was a stain called the Golgi stain .
And it works in a very particular way .
Instead of staining all of the cells inside of a tissue , it somehow only stains about one percent of them .
It clears the forest , reveals the trees inside .
If everything had been labeled , nothing would have been visible .
So somehow it shows whats there .
Spanish neuroanatomist Santiago Ramon y Cajal , whos widely considered the father of modern neuroscience , applied this Golgi stain , which yields data which looks like this , and really gave us the modern notion of the nerve cell , the neuron .
And if youre thinking of the brain as a computer , this is the transistor .
And very quickly Cajal realized that neurons dont operate alone , but rather make connections with others that form circuits just like in a computer .
Today , a century later , when researchers want to visualize neurons , they light them up from the inside rather than darkening them .
And theres several ways of doing this .
But one of the most popular ones involves green fluorescent protein .
Now green fluorescent protein , which oddly enough comes from a bioluminescent jellyfish , is very useful .
Because if you can get the gene for green fluorescent protein and deliver it to a cell , that cell will glow green  -  -  or any of the many variants now of green fluorescent protein , you get a cell to glow many different colors .
And so coming back to the brain , this is from a genetically engineered mouse called  Brainbow . 
And its so called , of course , because all of these neurons are glowing different colors .
Now sometimes neuroscientists need to identify individual molecular components of neurons , molecules , rather than the entire cell .
And theres several ways of doing this , but one of the most popular ones involves using antibodies .
And youre familiar , of course , with antibodies as the henchmen of the immune system .
But it turns out that theyre so useful to the immune system because they can recognize specific molecules , like , for example , the code protein of a virus thats invading the body .
And researchers have used this fact in order to recognize specific molecules inside of the brain , recognize specific substructures of the cell and identify them individually .
And a lot of the images Ive been showing you here are very beautiful , but theyre also very powerful .
They have great explanatory power .
This , for example , is an antibody staining against serotonin transporters in a slice of mouse brain .
And youve heard of serotonin , of course , in the context of diseases like depression and anxiety .
Youve heard of SSRIs , which are drugs that are used to treat these diseases .
And in order to understand how serotonin works , its critical to understand where the serontonin machinery is .
And antibody stainings like this one can be used to understand that sort of question .
Id like to leave you with the following thought : Green fluorescent protein and antibodies are both totally natural products at the get - go .
They were evolved by nature in order to get a jellyfish to glow green for whatever reason , or in order to detect the code protein of an invading virus , for example .
And only much later did scientists come onto the scene and say ,  Hey , these are tools , these are functions that we could use in our own research tool palette . 
And instead of applying feeble human minds to designing these tools from scratch , there were these ready - made solutions right out there in nature developed and refined steadily for millions of years by the greatest engineer of all .
Thank you .
Lian Pin Koh : A drones - eye view of conservation
Ecologist Lian Pin Koh makes a persuasive case for using drones to protect the worlds forests and wildlife . These lightweight autonomous flying vehicles can track animals in their natural habitat , monitor the health of rainforests , even combat crime by detecting poachers via thermal imaging . Added bonus ? Theyre also entirely affordable .
When we think of Nepal , we tend to think of the snow - capped mountains of the Himalayas , the crystal - clear still waters of its alpine lakes , or the huge expanse of its grasslands .
What some of us may not realize is that in the Himalayan foothills , where the climate is much warmer and the landscape much greener , there lives a great diversity of wildlife , including the one - horned rhinoceros , the Asian elephant and the Bengal tiger .
But unfortunately , these animals are under constant threat from poachers who hunt and kill them for their body parts .
To stop the killing of these animals , battalions of soldiers and rangers are sent to protect Nepals national parks , but that is not an easy task , because these soldiers have to patrol thousands of hectares of forests on foot or elephant backs .
It is also risky for these soldiers when they get into gunfights with poachers , and therefore Nepal is always looking for new ways to help with protecting the forests and wildlife .
Well recently , Nepal acquired a new tool in the fight against wildlife crime , and these are drones , or more specifically , conservation drones .
For about a year now , my colleagues and I have been building drones for Nepal and training the park protection personnel on the use of these drones .
Not only does a drone give you a birds - eye view of the landscape , but it also allows you to capture detailed , high - resolution images of objects on the ground .
This , for example , is a pair of rhinoceros taking a cooling bath on a hot summer day in the lowlands of Nepal .
Now we believe that drones have tremendous potential , not only for combating wildlife crime , but also for monitoring the health of these wildlife populations .
So what is a drone ?
Well , the kind of drone Im talking about is simply a model aircraft fitted with an autopilot system , and this autopilot unit contains a tiny computer , a GPS , a compass , a barometric altimeter and a few other sensors .
Now a drone like this is meant to carry a useful payload , such as a video camera or a photographic camera .
It also requires a software that allows the user to program a mission , to tell the drone where to go .
Now people I talk to are often surprised when they hear that these are the only four components that make a conservation drone , but they are even more surprised when I tell them how affordable these components are .
The facts is , a conservation drone doesnt cost very much more than a good laptop computer or a decent pair of binoculars .
So now that youve built your own conservation drone , you probably want to go fly it , but how does one fly a drone ?
Well , actually , you dont , because the drone flies itself .
All you have to do is to program a mission to tell the drone where to fly .
But you simply do that by clicking on a few way points on the Google Maps interface using the open - source software .
Those missions could be as simple as just a few way points , or they could be slightly longer and more complicated , to fly along a river system .
Sometimes , we fly the drone in a lawnmower - type pattern and take pictures of that area , and those pictures can be processed to produce a map of that forest .
Other researchers might want to fly the drone along the boundaries of a forest to watch out for poachers or people who might be trying to enter the forest illegally .
Now whatever your mission is , once youve programmed it , you simply upload it to the autopilot system , bring your drone to the field , and launch it simply by tossing it in the air .
And often well go about this mission taking pictures or videos along the way , and usually at that point , we will go grab ourselves a cup of coffee , sit back , and relax for the next few minutes , although some of us sit back and panic for the next few minutes worrying that the drone will not return .
Usually it does , and when it does , it even lands automatically .
So what can we do with a conservation drone ?
Well , when we built our first prototype drone , our main objective was to fly it over a remote rainforest in North Sumatra , Indonesia , to look for the nest of a species of great ape known as the orangutan .
The reason we wanted to do that was because we needed to know how many individuals of this species are still left in that forest .
Now the traditional method of surveying for orangutans is to walk the forest on foot carrying heavy equipment and to use a pair of binoculars to look up in the treetops where you might find an orangutan or its nest .
Now as you can imagine , that is a very time - consuming , labor - intensive , and costly process , so we were hoping that drones could significantly reduce the cost of surveying for orangutan populations in Indonesia and elsewhere in Southeast Asia .
So we were very excited when we captured our first pair of orangutan nests on camera .
And this is it ; this is the first ever picture of orangutan nests taken with a drone .
Since then we have taken pictures of dozens of these nests from around various parts of Southeast Asia , and were now working with computer scientists to develop algorithms that can automatically count the number of nests from the thousands of photos weve collected so far .
But nests are not the only objects these drones can detect .
This is a wild orangutan happily feeding on top of a palm tree , seemingly oblivious to our drone that was flying overhead , not once but several times .
Weve also taken pictures of other animals including forest buffalos in Gabon , elephants , and even turtle nests .
But besides taking pictures of just the animals themselves , we also take pictures of the habitats these animals live in , because we want to keep track of the health of these habitats .
Sometimes , we zoom out a little and look at other things that might be happening in the landscape .
This is an oil palm plantation in Sumatra .
Now oil palm is a major driver of deforestation in that part of the world , so we wanted to use this new drone technology to keep track of the spread of these plantations in Southeast Asia .
But drones could also be used to keep track of illegal logging activities .
This is a recently logged forest , again in Sumatra .
You could even still see the processed wooden planks left on the ground .
But perhaps the most exciting part about taking pictures from the air is we could later stitch these pictures together using special software to create a map of the entire landscape , and this map gives us crucial information for monitoring land use change , to let us know where and when plantations might be expanding , where forests might be contracting , or where fires might be breaking out .
Aerial images could also be processed to produce three - dimensional computer models of forests .
Now these models are not just visually appealing , but they are also geometrically accurate , which means researchers can now measure the distance between trees , calculate surface area , the volume of vegetation , and so on , all of which are important information for monitoring the health of these forests .
Recently , weve also begun experimenting with thermal imaging cameras .
Now these cameras can detect heat - emitting objects from the ground , and therefore they are very useful for detecting poachers or their campfires at night .
So Ive told you quite a lot about what conservation drones are , how you might operate one of these drones , and what a drone could do for you .
I will now tell you where conservation drones are being used around the world .
We built our first prototype drones in Switzerland .
We brought a few of these to Indonesia for the first few test flights .
Since then , weve been building drones for our collaborators from around the world , and these include fellow biologists and partners from major conservation organizations .
Perhaps the best and most rewarding part about working with these collaborators is the feedback they give us on how to improve our drones .
Building drones for us is a constant work in progress .
We are constantly trying to improve them in terms of their range , their ruggedness , and the amount of payload they can carry .
We also work with collaborators to discover new ways of using these drones .
For example , camera traps are a common tool used by biologists to take pictures of shy animals hiding in the forests , but these are motion - activated cameras , so they snap a picture every time an animal crosses their path .
But the problem with camera traps is that the researcher has to go back to the forest every so often to retrieve those images , and that takes a lot of time , especially if there are dozens or hundreds of these cameras placed in the forest .
Now a drone could be designed to perform the task much more efficiently .
This drone , carrying a special sensor , could be flown over the forest and remotely download these images from wi - fi – enabled cameras .
Radio collars are another tool thats commonly used by biologists .
Now these collars are put onto animals .
They transmit a radio signal which allows the researcher to track the movements of these animals across the landscape .
But the traditional way of tracking animals is pretty ridiculous , because it requires the researcher to be walking on the ground carrying a huge and cumbersome radio antenna , not unlike those old TV antennae we used to have on our rooftops . Some of us still do .
A drone could be used to do the same job much more efficiently .
Why not equip a drone with a scanning radio receiver , fly that over the forest canopy in a certain pattern which would allow the user or the operator to triangulate the location of these radio - collared animals remotely without having to step foot in the forest .
A third and perhaps most exciting way of using these drones is to fly them to a really remote , never - explored - before rainforest somewhere hidden in the tropics , and parachute down a tiny spy microphone that would allow us to eavesdrop on the calls of mammals , birds , amphibians , the Yeti , the Sasquatch , Bigfoot , whatever .
That would give us biologists a pretty good idea of what animals might be living in those forests .
And finally , I would like to show you the latest version of our conservation drone .
The MAJA drone has a wingspan of about two meters .
It weighs only about two kilograms , but it can carry half its weight .
It is a fully autonomous system .
During its mission , it can even transmit a live video feed back to a ground station laptop , which allows the user to see what the drone is seeing in real time .
It carries a variety of sensors , and the photo quality of some of these sensors can be as high as one to two centimeters per pixel .
This drone can stay in the air for 40 to 60 minutes , which gives it a range of up to 50 kilometers .
That is quite sufficient for most of our conservation applications .
Now , conservation drones began as a crazy idea from two biologists who are just deeply passionate about this technology .
And we believe , strongly believe , that drones can and will be a game changer for conservation research and applications .
Weve had our fair share of skeptics and critics who thought that we were just fooling around with toy planes .
And in a way , they are right .
I mean , lets be honest , drones are the ultimate toys for boys .
But at the same time , weve also gotten to know many wonderful colleagues and collaborators who share our vision and see the potential of conservation drones .
To us , it is obvious that conservation biologists and practitioners should make full use of every available tool , including drones , in our fight to save the last remaining forests and wildlife of this planet .
Thank you .
Anthony Atala : Printing a human kidney
Surgeon Anthony Atala demonstrates an early - stage experiment that could someday solve the organ - donor problem : a 3D printer that uses living cells to output a transplantable kidney . Using similar technology , Dr . Atalas young patient Luke Massella received an engineered bladder 10 years ago ; we meet him onstage .
Theres actually a major health crisis today in terms of the shortage of organs .
The fact is that were living longer .
Medicine has done a much better job of making us live longer , and the problem is , as we age , our organs tend to fail more , and so currently there are not enough organs to go around .
In fact , in the last 10 years , the number of patients requiring an organ has doubled , while in the same time , the actual number of transplants has barely gone up .
So this is now a public health crisis .
So thats where this field comes in that we call the field of regenerative medicine .
It really involves many different areas .
You can use , actually , scaffolds , biomaterials  -  -  theyre like the piece of your blouse or your shirt  -  -  but specific materials you can actually implant in patients and they will do well and help you regenerate .
Or we can use cells alone , either your very own cells or different stem cell populations .
Or we can use both .
We can use , actually , biomaterials and the cells together .
And thats where the field is today .
But its actually not a new field .
Interestingly , this is a book that was published back in 1938 .
Its titled  The Culture of Organs . 
The first author , Alexis Carrel , a Nobel Prize winner .
He actually devised some of the same technologies used today for suturing blood vessels , and some of the blood vessel grafts we use today were actually designed by Alexis .
But I want you to note his co - author : Charles Lindbergh .
Thats the same Charles Lindbergh who actually spent the rest of his life working with Alexis at the Rockefeller Institute in New York in the area of the culture of organs .
So if the fields been around for so long , why so few clinical advances ?
And that really has to do to many different challenges .
But if I were to point to three challenges , the first one is actually the design of materials that could go in your body and do well over time .
And many advances now , we can do that fairly readily .
The second challenge was cells .
We could not get enough of your cells to grow outside of your body .
Over the last 20 years , weve basically tackled that .
Many scientists can now grow many different types of cells .
Plus we have stem cells .
But even now , 2011 , theres still certain cells that we just cant grow from the patient .
Liver cells , nerve cells , pancreatic cells  -  -  we still cant grow them even today .
And the third challenge is vascularity , the actual supply of blood to allow those organs or tissues to survive once we regenerate them .
So we can actually use biomaterials now .
This is actually a biomaterial .
We can weave them , knit them , or we can make them like you see here .
This is actually like a cotton candy machine .
You saw the spray going in .
That was like the fibers of the cotton candy creating this structure , this tubularized structure , which is a biomaterial that we can then use to help your body regenerate using your very own cells to do so .
And thats exactly what we did here .
This is actually a patient who  was  presented with a deceased organ , and we then created one of these smart biomaterials , and then we then used that smart biomaterial to replace and repair that patients structure .
What we did was we actually used the biomaterial as a bridge so that the cells in the organ could walk on that bridge , if you will , and help to bridge the gap to regenerate that tissue .
And you see that patient now six months after with an X - ray showing you the regenerated tissue , which is fully regenerated when you analyze it under the microscope .
We can also use cells alone .
These are actually cells that we obtained .
These are stem cells that we create from specific sources , and we can drive them to become heart cells , and they start beating in culture .
So they know what to do .
The cells genetically know what to do , and they start beating together .
Now today , many clinical trials are using different kinds of stem cells for heart disease .
So thats actually now in patients .
Or if were going to use larger structures to replace larger structures , we can then use the patients own cells , or some cell population , and the biomaterials , the scaffolds , together .
So the concept here : so if you do have a deceased or injured organ , we take a very small piece of that tissue , less than half the size of a postage stamp .
We then tease the cells apart , we grow the cells outside the body .
We then take a scaffold , a biomaterial  -  -  again , looks very much like a piece of your blouse or your shirt  -  -  we then shape that material , and we then use those cells to coat that material one layer at a time  -  -  very much like baking a layer cake , if you will .
We then place it in an oven - like device , and were able to create that structure and bring it out .
This is actually a heart valve that weve engineered , and you can see here , we have the structure of the heart valve and weve seeded that with cells , and then we exercise it .
So you see the leaflets opening and closing  -  -  of this heart valve thats currently being used experimentally to try to get it to further studies .
Another technology that we have used in patients actually involves bladders .
We actually take a very small piece of the bladder from the patient  -  -  less than half the size of a postage stamp .
We then grow the cells outside the body , take the scaffold , coat the scaffold with the cells  -  -  the patients own cells , two different cell types .
We then put it in this oven - like device .
It has the same conditions as the human body  -  -  37 degrees centigrade , 95 percent oxygen .
A few weeks later , you have your engineered organ that were able to implant back into the patient .
For these specific patients , we actually just suture these materials .
We use three - dimensional imagining analysis , but we actually created these biomaterials by hand .
But we now have better ways to create these structures with the cells .
We use now some type of technologies , where for solid organs , for example , like the liver , what we do is we take discard livers .
As you know , a lot of organs are actually discarded , not used .
So we can take these liver structures , which are not going to be used , and we then put them in a washing machine - like structure that will allow the cells to be washed away .
Two weeks later , you have something that looks like a liver .
You can hold it like a liver , but it has no cells ; its just a skeleton of the liver .
And we then can re - perfuse the liver with cells , preserving the blood vessel tree .
So we actually perfuse first the blood vessel tree with the patients own blood vessel cells , and we then infiltrate the parenchyma with the liver cells .
And we now have been able just to show the creation of human liver tissue just this past month using this technology .
Another technology that weve used is actually that of printing .
This is actually a desktop inkjet printer , but instead of using ink , were using cells .
And you can actually see here the printhead going through and printing this structure , and it takes about 40 minutes to print this structure .
And theres a 3D elevator that then actually goes down one layer at a time each time the printhead goes through .
And then finally youre able to get that structure out .
You can pop that structure out of the printer and implant it .
And this is actually a piece of bone that Im going to show you in this slide that was actually created with this desktop printer and implanted as you see here .
That was all new bone that was implanted using these techniques .
Another more advanced technology were looking at right now , our next generation of technologies , are more sophisticated printers .
This particular printer were designing now is actually one where we print right on the patient .
So what you see here  -  -  I know it sounds funny , but thats the way it works .
Because in reality , what you want to do is you actually want to have the patient on the bed with the wound , and you have a scanner , basically like a flatbed scanner .
Thats what you see here on the right side .
You see a scanner technology that first scans the wound on the patient and then it comes back with the printheads actually printing the layers that you require on the patients themselves .
This is how it actually works .
Heres the scanner going through , scanning the wound .
Once its scanned , it sends information in the correct layers of cells where they need to be .
And now youre going to see here a demo of this actually being done in a representative wound .
And we actually do this with a gel so that you can lift the gel material .
So once those cells are on the patient they will stick where they need to be .
And this is actually new technology still under development .
Were also working on more sophisticated printers .
Because in reality , our biggest challenge are the solid organs .
I dont know if you realize this , but 90 percent of the patients on the transplant list are actually waiting for a kidney .
Patients are dying every day because we dont have enough of those organs to go around .
So this is more challenging  -  -  large organ , vascular , a lot of blood vessel supply , a lot of cells present .
So the strategy here is  -  -  this is actually a CT scan , an X - ray  -  -  and we go layer by layer , using computerized morphometric imaging analysis and 3D reconstruction to get right down to those patients own kidneys .
We then are able to actually image those , do 360 degree rotation to analyze the kidney in its full volumetric characteristics , and we then are able to actually take this information and then scan this in a printing computerized form .
So we go layer by layer through the organ , analyzing each layer as we go through the organ , and we then are able to send that information , as you see here , through the computer and actually design the organ for the patient .
This actually shows the actual printer .
And this actually shows that printing .
In fact , we actually have the printer right here .
So while weve been talking today , you can actually see the printer back here in the back stage .
Thats actually the actual printer right now , and thats been printing this kidney structure that you see here .
It takes about seven hours to print a kidney , so this is about three hours into it now .
And Dr . Kangs going to walk onstage right now , and were actually going to show you one of these kidneys that we printed a little bit earlier today .
Put a pair of gloves here .
Thank you .
Go backwards .
So , these gloves are a little bit small on me , but here it is .
You can actually see that kidney as it was printed earlier today .
Has a little bit of consistency to it .
This is Dr . Kang whos been working with us on this project , and part of our team .
Thank you , Dr . Kang . I appreciate it .
So this is actually a new generation .
This is actually the printer that you see here onstage .
And this is actually a new technology were working on now .
In reality , we now have a long history of doing this .
Im going to share with you a clip in terms of technology we have had in patients now for a while .
And this is actually a very brief clip  -  -  only about 30 seconds  -  -  of a patient who actually received an organ .
Luke Massella : I was really sick . I could barely get out of bed .
I was missing school . It was pretty much miserable .
I couldnt go out and play basketball at recess without feeling like I was going to pass out when I got back inside .
I felt so sick .
I was facing basically a lifetime of dialysis , and I dont even like to think about what my life would be like if I was on that .
So after the surgery , life got a lot better for me .
I was able to do more things .
I was able to wrestle in high school .
I became the captain of the team , and that was great .
I was able to be a normal kid with my friends .
And because they used my own cells to build this bladder , its going to be with me .
Ive got it for life , so Im all set .
Juan Enriquez : These experiments sometimes work , and its very cool when they do .
Luke , come up please .
So Luke , before last night , whens the last time you saw Tony ?
LM : Ten years ago , when I had my surgery  -  -  and its really great to see him .
JE : And tell us a little bit about what youre doing .
LM : Well right now Im in college at the University of Connecticut .
Im a sophomore and studying communications , TV and mass media , and basically trying to live life like a normal kid , which I always wanted growing up .
But it was hard to do that when I was born with spina bifida and my kidneys and bladder werent working .
I went through about 16 surgeries , and it seemed impossible to do that when I was in kidney failure when I was 10 .
And this surgery came along and basically made me who I am today and saved my life .
JE : And Tonys done hundreds of these ?
LM : What I know from , hes working really hard in his lab and coming up with crazy stuff .
I know I was one of the first 10 people to have this surgery .
And when I was 10 , I didnt realize how amazing it was .
I was a little kid , and I was like ,  Yeah . Ill have that . Ill have that surgery . 
All I wanted to do was to get better , and I didnt realize how amazing it really was until now that Im older and I see the amazing things that hes doing .
JE : When you got this call out of the blue  -  -  Tonys really shy , and it took a lot of convincing to get somebody as modest as Tony to allow us to bring Luke .
So Luke , you go to your communications professors  -  -  youre majoring in communications  -  -  and you ask them for permission to come to TED , which might have a little bit to do with communications , and what was their reaction ?
LM : Most of my professors were all for it , and they said ,  Bring pictures and show me the clips online ,  and  Im happy for you . 
There were a couple that were a little stubborn , but I had to talk to them .
I pulled them aside .
JE : Well , its an honor and a privilege to meet you .
Thank you so much .
JE : Thank you , Tony .
Tom Shannon , John Hockenberry : The painter and the pendulum
TED visits Tom Shannon in his Manhattan studio for an intimate look at his science - inspired art . An eye - opening , personal conversation with John Hockenberry reveals how natures forces  -  -  and the onset of Parkinsons tremors  -  -  interact in his life and craft .
John Hockenberry : Its great to be here with you , Tom .
And I want to start with a question that has just been consuming me since I first became familiar with your work .
In you work theres always this kind of hybrid quality of a natural force in some sort of interplay with creative force .
Are they ever in equilibrium in the way that you see your work ?
Tom Shannon : Yeah , the subject matter that Im looking for , its usually to solve a question .
I had the question popped into my head : What does the cone that connects the sun and the Earth look like if you could connect the two spheres ?
And in proportion , what would the size of the sphere and the length , and what would the taper be to the Earth ?
And so I went about and made that sculpture , turning it out of solid bronze .
And I did one that was about 35 feet long .
The sun end was about four inches in diameter , and then it tapered over about 35 feet to about a millimeter at the Earth end .
And so for me , it was really exciting just to see what it looks like if you could step outside and into a larger context , as though you were an astronaut , and see these two things as an object , because they are so intimately bound , and one is meaningless without the other .
JH : Is there a relief in playing with these forces ?
And Im wondering how much of a sense of discovery there is in playing with these forces .
TS : Well , like the magnetically levitated objects  -  -  like that silver one there , that was the result of hundreds of experiments with magnets , trying to find a way to make something float with the least possible connection to the ground .
So I got it down to just one tether to be able to support that .
JH : Now is this electromagnetic here , or are these static ?
TS : Those are permanent magnets , yeah .
JH : Because if the power went out , there would just be a big noise .
TS : Yeah .
Its really unsatisfactory having plug - in art .
JH : I agree .
TS : The magnetic works are a combination of gravity and magnetism , so its a kind of mixture of these ambient forces that influence everything .
The sun has a tremendous field that extends way beyond the planets and the Earths magnetic field protects us from the sun .
So theres this huge invisible shape structures that magnetism takes in the universe .
But with the pendulum , it allows me to manifest these invisible forces that are holding the magnets up .
My sculptures are normally very simplified .
I try to refine them down to very simple forms .
But the paintings become very complex , because I think the fields that are supporting them , theyre billowing , and theyre interpenetrating , and theyre interference patterns .
JH : And theyre non - deterministic .
I mean , you dont know necessarily where youre headed when you begin , even though the forces can be calculated .
So the evolution of this  -  -  I gather this isnt your first pendulum .
TS : No .
TS : The first one I did was in the late 70s , and I just had a simple cone with a spigot at the bottom of it .
I threw it into an orbit , and it only had one color , and when it got to the center , the paint kept running out , so I had to run in there , didnt have any control over the spigot remotely .
So that told me right away : I need a remote control device .
But then I started dreaming of having six colors .
I sort of think about it as the DNA  -  -  these colors , the red , blue , yellow , the primary colors and white and black .
And if you put them together in different combinations  -  -  just like printing in a sense , like how a magazine color is printed  -  -  and put them under certain forces , which is orbiting them or passing them back and forth or drawing with them , these amazing things started appearing .
JH : It looks like were loaded for bear here .
TS : Yeah , well lets put a couple of canvases .
Ill ask a couple of my sons to set up the canvases here .
I want to just say  -  -  so this is Jack , Nick and Louie .
JH : Thanks guys .
TS : So here are the  -  -  JH : All right , Ill get out of the way here .
TS : Im just going to throw this into an orbit and see if I can paint everybodys shoes in the front .
JH : Whoa . That is ...
ooh , nice .
TS : So something like this .
Im doing this as a demo , and its more playful , but inevitably , all of this can be used .
I can redeem this painting , just continuing on , doing layers upon layers .
And I keep it around for a couple of weeks , and Im contemplating it , and Ill do another session with it and bring it up to another level , where all of this becomes the background , the depth of it .
JH : Thats fantastic .
So the valves at the bottom of those tubes there are like radio - controlled airplane valves .
TS : Yes , theyre servos with cams that pinch these rubber tubes .
And they can pinch them very tight and stop it , or you can have them wide open .
And all of the colors come out one central port at the bottom .
You can always be changing colors , put aluminum paint , or I could put anything into this .
It could be tomato sauce , or anything could be dispensed  -  -  sand , powders or anything like that .
JH : So many forces there .
Youve got gravity , youve got the centrifugal force , youve got the fluid dynamics .
Each of these beautiful paintings , are they images in and of themselves , or are they records of a physical event called the pendulum approaching the canvas ?
TS : Well , this painting here , I wanted to do something very simple , a simple , iconic image of two ripples interfering .
So the one on the right was done first , and then the one on the left was done over it .
And then I left gaps so you could see the one that was done before .
And then when I did the second one , it really disturbed the piece  -  -  these big blue lines crashing through the center of it  -  -  and so it created a kind of tension and an overlap .
There are lines in front of the one on the right , and there are lines behind the one on the left , and so it takes it into different planes .
What its also about , just the little events , the events of the interpenetration of  -  -  JH : Two stars , or  -  -  TS : Two things that happened  -  -  theres an interference pattern , and then a third thing happens .
There are shapes that come about just by the marriage of two events that are happening , and Im very interested in that .
Like the occurrence of moire patterns .
Like this green one , this is a painting I did about 10 years ago , but it has some  -  -  see , in the upper third  -  -  there are these moires and interference patterns that are radio kind of imagery .
And thats something that in painting Ive never seen done .
Ive never seen a representation of a kind of radio interference patterns , which are so ubiquitous and such an important part of our lives .
JH : Is that a literal part of the image , or is my eye making that interference pattern  -  -  is my eye completing that interference pattern ?
TS : It is the paint actually , makes it real .
Its really manifested there .
If I throw a very concentric circle , or concentric ellipse , it just dutifully makes these evenly spaced lines , which get closer and closer together , which describes how gravity works .
Theres something very appealing about the exactitude of science that I really enjoy .
And I love the shapes that I see in scientific observations and apparatus , especially astronomical forms and the idea of the vastness of it , the scale , is very interesting to me .
My focus in recent years has kind of shifted more toward biology .
Some of these paintings , when you look at them very close , odd things appear that really look like horses or birds or crocodiles , elephants .
There are lots of things that appear .
When you look into it , its sort of like looking at cloud patterns , but sometimes theyre very modeled and highly rendered .
And then there are all these forms that we dont know what they are , but theyre equally well - resolved and complex .
So I think , conceivably , those could be predictive .
Because since it has the ability to make forms that look like forms that were familiar with in biology , its also making other forms that were not familiar with .
And maybe its the kind of forms well discover underneath the surface of Mars , where there are probably lakes with fish swimming under the surface .
JH : Oh , lets hope so . Oh , my God , lets .
Oh , please , yes . Oh , Im so there .
You know , it seems at this stage in your life , you also very personally are in this state of confrontation with a sort of dissonant  -  -  I suppose its an electromagnetic force that somehow governs your Parkinsons and this creative force that is both the artist who is in the here and now and this sort of arc of your whole life .
Is that relevant to your work ?
TS : As it turns out , this device kind of comes in handy , because I dont have to have the fine motor skills to do , that I can operate slides , which is more of a mental process .
Im looking at it and making decisions : It needs more red , it needs more blue , it needs a different shape .
And so I make these creative decisions and can execute them in a much , much simpler way .
I mean , Ive got the symptoms .
I guess Parkinsons kind of creeps up over the years , but at a certain point you start seeing the symptoms .
In my case , my left hand has a significant tremor and my left leg also .
Im left - handed , and so I draw .
All my creations really start on small drawings , which I have thousands of , and its my way of just thinking .
I draw with a simple pencil , and at first , the Parkinsons was really upsetting , because I couldnt get the pencil to stand still .
JH : So youre not a gatekeeper for these forces .
You dont think of yourself as the master of these forces .
You think of yourself as the servant .
TS : Nature is  -  -  well , its a godsend .
It just has so much in it .
And I think nature wants to express itself in the sense that we are nature , humans are of the universe .
The universe is in our mind , and our minds are in the universe .
And we are expressions of the universe , basically .
As humans , ultimately being part of the universe , were kind of the spokespeople or the observer part of the constituency of the universe .
And to interface with it , with a device that lets these forces that are everywhere act and show what they can do , giving them pigment and paint just like an artist , its a good ally .
Its a terrific studio assistant .
JH : Well , I love the idea that somewhere within this idea of fine motion and control with the traditional skills that you have with your hand , some sort of more elemental force gets revealed , and thats the beauty here .
Tom , thank you so much . Its been really , really great .
TS : Thank you , John .
Moshe Safdie : How to reinvent the apartment building
In 1967 , Moshe Safdie reimagined the monolithic apartment building , creating  Habitat 67 ,  which gave each unit an unprecedented sense of openness . Nearly 50 years later , he believes the need for this type of building is greater than ever . In this short talk , Safdie surveys a range of projects that do away with the high - rise and let light permeate into densely - packed cities .
When , in 1960 , still a student , I got a traveling fellowship to study housing in North America .
We traveled the country .
We saw public housing high - rise buildings in all major cities : New York , Philadelphia .
Those who have no choice lived there .
And then we traveled from suburb to suburb , and I came back thinking , weve got to reinvent the apartment building .
There has to be another way of doing this .
We cant sustain suburbs , so lets design a building which gives the qualities of a house to each unit .
Habitat would be all about gardens , contact with nature , streets instead of corridors .
We prefabricated it so we would achieve economy , and there it is almost 50 years later .
Its a very desirable place to live in .
Its now a heritage building , but it did not proliferate .
In 1973 , I made my first trip to China .
It was the Cultural Revolution .
We traveled the country , met with architects and planners .
This is Beijing then , not a single high rise building in Beijing or Shanghai .
Shenzhen didnt even exist as a city .
There were hardly any cars .
Thirty years later , this is Beijing today .
This is Hong Kong .
If youre wealthy , you live there , if youre poor , you live there , but high density it is , and its not just Asia .
São Paulo , you can travel in a helicopter 45 minutes seeing those high - rise buildings consume the 19th - century low - rise environment .
And with it , comes congestion , and we lose mobility , and so on and so forth .
So a few years ago , we decided to go back and rethink Habitat .
Could we make it more affordable ?
Could we actually achieve this quality of life in the densities that are prevailing today ?
And we realized , its basically about light , its about sun , its about nature , its about fractalization .
Can we open up the surface of the building so that it has more contact with the exterior ?
We came up with a number of models : economy models , cheaper to build and more compact ; membranes of housing where people could design their own house and create their own gardens .
And then we decided to take New York as a test case , and we looked at Lower Manhattan .
And we mapped all the building area in Manhattan .
On the left is Manhattan today : blue for housing , red for office buildings , retail .
On the right , we reconfigured it : the office buildings form the base , and then rising 75 stories above , are apartments .
Theres a street in the air on the 25th level , a community street .
Its permeable .
There are gardens and open spaces for the community , almost every unit with its own private garden , and community space all around .
And most important , permeable , open .
It does not form a wall or an obstruction in the city , and light permeates everywhere .
And in the last two or three years , weve actually been , for the first time , realizing the quality of life of Habitat in real - life projects across Asia .
This in Qinhuangdao in China : middle - income housing , where there is a bylaw that every apartment must receive three hours of sunlight .
Thats measured in the winter solstice .
And under construction in Singapore , again middle - income housing , gardens , community streets and parks and so on and so forth .
And Colombo .
And I want to touch on one more issue , which is the design of the public realm .
A hundred years after weve begun building with tall buildings , we are yet to understand how the tall high - rise building becomes a building block in making a city , in creating the public realm .
In Singapore , we had an opportunity : 10 million square feet , extremely high density .
Taking the concept of outdoor and indoor , promenades and parks integrated with intense urban life .
So they are outdoor spaces and indoor spaces , and you move from one to the other , and there is contact with nature , and most relevantly , at every level of the structure , public gardens and open space : on the roof of the podium , climbing up the towers , and finally on the roof , the sky park , two and a half acres , jogging paths , restaurants , and the worlds longest swimming pool .
And thats all I can tell you in five minutes .
Thank you .
Siegfried Woldhek : The search for the true face of Leonardo
Mona Lisa is one of the best - known faces on the planet . But would you recognize an image of Leonardo da Vinci ? Illustrator Siegfried Woldhek uses some thoughtful image - analysis techniques to find what he believes is the true face of Leonardo .
Good morning .
Lets look for a minute at the greatest icon of all , Leonardo da Vinci .
Were all familiar with his fantastic work  -  -  his drawings , his paintings , his inventions , his writings .
But we do not know his face .
Thousands of books have been written about him , but theres controversy , and it remains , about his looks .
Even this well - known portrait is not accepted by many art historians .
So , what do you think ?
Is this the face of Leonardo da Vinci or isnt it ?
Lets find out .
Leonardo was a man that drew everything around him .
He drew people , anatomy , plants , animals , landscapes , buildings , water , everything .
But no faces ?
I find that hard to believe .
His contemporaries made faces , like the ones you see here  -  -  en face or three - quarters .
So , surely a passionate drawer like Leonardo must have made self - portraits from time to time .
So lets try to find them .
I think that if we were to scan all of his work and look for self - portraits , we would find his face looking at us .
So I looked at all of his drawings , more than 700 , and looked for male portraits .
There are about 120 , you see them here .
Which ones of these could be self - portraits ?
Well , for that they have to be done as we just saw , en face or three - quarters .
So we can eliminate all the profiles .
It also has to be sufficiently detailed .
So we can also eliminate the ones that are very vague or very stylized .
And we know from his contemporaries that Leonardo was a very handsome , even beautiful man .
So we can also eliminate the ugly ones or the caricatures .
And look what happens  -  -  only three candidates remain that fit the bill .
And here they are .
Yes , indeed , the old man is there , as is this famous pen drawing of the Homo Vitruvianus .
And lastly , the only portrait of a male that Leonardo painted ,  The Musician . 
Before we go into these faces , I should explain why I have some right to talk about them .
Ive made more than 1,100 portraits myself for newspapers , over the course of 300  -  -  30 years , sorry , 30 years only .
But there are 1,100 , and very few artists have drawn so many faces .
So I know a little about drawing and analyzing faces .
OK , now lets look at these three portraits .
And hold onto your seats , because if we zoom in on those faces , remark how they have the same broad forehead , the horizontal eyebrows , the long nose , the curved lips and the small , well - developed chin .
I couldnt believe my eyes when I first saw that .
There is no reason why these portraits should look alike .
All we did was look for portraits that had the characteristics of a self - portrait , and look , they are very similar .
Now , are they made in the right order ?
The young man should be made first .
And as you see here from the years that they were created , it is indeed the case .
They are made in the right order .
What was the age of Leonardo at the time ? Does that fit ?
Yes , it does . He was 33 , 38 and 63 when these were made .
So we have three pictures , potentially of the same person of the same age as Leonardo at the time .
But how do we know its him , and not someone else ?
Well , we need a reference .
And heres the only picture of Leonardo thats widely accepted .
Its a statue made by Verrocchio , of David , for which Leonardo posed as a boy of 15 .
And if we now compare the face of the statue , with the face of the musician , you see the very same features again .
The statue is the reference , and it connects the identity of Leonardo to those three faces .
Ladies and gentlemen , this story has not yet been published .
Its only proper that you here at TED hear and see it first .
The icon of icons finally has a face .
Here he is : Leonardo da Vinci .
Eric Dishman : Health care should be a team sport
When Eric Dishman was in college , doctors told him he had 2 to 3 years to live . That was a long time ago . Now , Dishman puts his experience and his expertise as a medical tech specialist together to suggest a bold idea for reinventing health care  -  -  by putting the patient at the center of a treatment team .
I want to share some personal friends and stories with you that Ive actually never talked about in public before to help illustrate the idea and the need and the hope for us to reinvent our health care system around the world .
Twenty - four years ago , I had  -  -  a sophomore in college , I had a series of fainting spells . No alcohol was involved .
And I ended up in student health , and they ran some labwork and came back right away , and said ,  Kidney problems . 
And before I knew it , I was involved and thrown into this six months of tests and trials and tribulations with six doctors across two hospitals in this clash of medical titans to figure out which one of them was right about what was wrong with me .
And Im sitting in a waiting room some time later for an ultrasound , and all six of these doctors actually show up in the room at once , and Im like ,  Uh oh , this is bad news . 
And their diagnosis was this : They said ,  You have two rare kidney diseases that are going to actually destroy your kidneys eventually , you have cancer - like cells in your immune system that we need to start treatment right away , and youll never be eligible for a kidney transplant , and youre not likely to live more than two or three years . 
Now , with the gravity of this doomsday diagnosis , it just sucked me in immediately , as if I began preparing myself as a patient to die according to the schedule that they had just given to me , until I met a patient named Verna in a waiting room , who became a dear friend , and she grabbed me one day and took me off to the medical library and did a bunch of research on these diagnoses and these diseases , and said ,  Eric , these people who get this are normally in their 70s and 80s .
They dont know anything about you . Wake up .
Take control of your health and get on with your life . 
And I did .
Now , these people making these proclamations to me were not bad people .
In fact , these professionals were miracle workers , but theyre working in a flawed , expensive system thats set up the wrong way .
Its dependent on hospitals and clinics for our every care need .
Its dependent on specialists who just look at parts of us .
Its dependent on guesswork of diagnoses and drug cocktails , and so something either works or you die .
And its dependent on passive patients who just take it and dont ask any questions .
Now the problem with this model is that its unsustainable globally .
Its unaffordable globally .
We need to invent what I call a personal health system .
So what does this personal health system look like , and what new technologies and roles is it going to entail ?
Now , Im going to start by actually sharing with you a new friend of mine , Libby , somebody Ive become quite attached to over the last six months .
This is Libby , or actually , this is an ultrasound image of Libby .
This is the kidney transplant I was never supposed to have .
Now , this is an image that we shot a couple of weeks ago for today , and youll notice , on the edge of this image , theres some dark spots there , which was really concerning to me .
So were going to actually do a live exam to sort of see how Libbys doing .
This is not a wardrobe malfunction . I have to take my belt off here .
Dont you in the front row worry or anything .
Im going to use a device from a company called Mobisante .
This is a portable ultrasound .
It can plug into a smartphone . It can plug into a tablet .
Mobisante is up in Redmond , Washington , and they kindly trained me to actually do this on myself .
Theyre not approved to do this . Patients are not approved to do this .
This is a concept demo , so I want to make that clear .
All right , I gotta gel up .
Now the people in the front row are very nervous .
And I want to actually introduce you to Dr . Batiuk , whos another friend of mine .
Hes up in Legacy Good Samaritan Hospital in Portland , Oregon .
So let me just make sure . Hey , Dr . Batiuk . Can you hear me okay ?
And actually , can you see Libby ?
Thomas Batuik : Hi there , Eric .
You look busy . How are you ?
Eric Dishman : Im good . Im just taking my clothes off in front of a few hundred people . Its wonderful .
So I just wanted to see , is this the image you need to get ?
And I know you want to look and see if those spots are still there .
TB : Okay . Well lets scan around a little bit here , give me a lay of the land .
ED : All right . TB : Okay . Turn it a little bit inside , a little bit toward the middle for me .
Okay , thats good . How about up a little bit ?
Okay , freeze that image . Thats a good one for me .
ED : All right . Now last week , when I did this , you had me measure that spot to the right .
Should I do that again ?
TB : Yeah , lets do that .
ED : All right . This is kind of hard to do with one hand on your belly and one hand on measuring , but Ive got it , I think , and Ill save that image and send it to you .
So tell me a little bit about what this dark spot means .
Its not something I was very happy about .
TB : Many people after a kidney transplant will develop a little fluid collection around the kidney .
Most of the time it doesnt create any kind of mischief , but it does warrant looking at , so Im happy weve got an opportunity to look at it today , make sure that its not growing , its not creating any problems .
Based on the other images we have , Im really happy how it looks today .
ED : All right . Well , I guess well double check it when I come in .
Ive got my six month biopsy in a couple of weeks , and Im going to let you do that in the clinic , because I dont think I can do that one on myself .
TB : Good choice . ED : All right , thanks , Dr . Batiuk .
All right . So what youre sort of seeing here is an example of disruptive technologies , of mobile , social and analytic technologies .
These are the foundations of whats going to make personal health possible .
Now theres really three pillars of this personal health I want to talk to you about now , and its care anywhere , care networking and care customization .
And you just saw a little bit of the first two with my interaction with Dr . Batiuk .
So lets start with care anywhere .
Humans invented the idea of hospitals and clinics in the 1780s . It is time to update our thinking .
We have got to untether clinicians and patients from the notion of traveling to a special bricks - and - mortar place for all of our care , because these places are often the wrong tool , and the most expensive tool , for the job .
And these are sometimes unsafe places to send our sickest patients , especially in an era of superbugs and hospital - acquired infections .
And many countries are going to go brickless from the start because theyre never going to be able to afford the mega - medicalplexes that a lot of the rest of the world has built .
Now I personally learned that hospitals can be a very dangerous place at a young age .
This was me in third grade .
I broke my elbow very seriously , had to have surgery , worried that they were going to actually lose the arm .
Recovering from the surgery in the hospital , I get bedsores .
Those bedsores become infected , and they give me an antibiotic which I end up being allergic to , and now my whole body breaks out , and now all of those become infected .
The longer I stayed in the hospital , the sicker I became , and the more expensive it became , and this happens to millions of people around the world every year .
The future of personal health that Im talking about says care must occur at home as the default model , not in a hospital or clinic .
You have to earn your way into those places by being sick enough to use that tool for the job .
Now the smartphones that were already carrying can clearly have diagnostic devices like ultrasounds plugged into them , and a whole array of others , today , and as sensing is built into these , well be able to do vital signs monitor and behavioral monitoring like weve never had before .
Many of us will have implantables that will actually look real - time at whats going on with our blood chemistry and in our proteins right now .
Now the software is also getting smarter , right ?
Think about a coach , an agent online , thats going to help me do safe self - care .
That same interaction that we just did with the ultrasound will likely have real - time image processing , and the device will say ,  Up , down , left , right , ah , Eric , thats the perfect spot to send that image off to your doctor . 
Now , if weve got all these networked devices that are helping us to do care anywhere , it stands to reason that we also need a team to be able to interact with all of that stuff , and that leads to the second pillar I want to talk about , care networking .
We have got to go beyond this paradigm of isolated specialists doing parts care to multidisciplinary teams doing person care .
Uncoordinated care today is expensive at best , and it is deadly at worst .
Eighty percent of medical errors are actually caused by communication and coordination problems amongst medical team members .
I had my own heart scare years ago in graduate school , when were under treatment for the kidney , and suddenly , theyre like ,  Oh , we think you have a heart problem . 
And I have these palpitations that are showing up .
They put me through five weeks of tests  -  -  very expensive , very scary  -  -  before the nurse finally notices the piece of the paper , my meds list that Ive been carrying to every single appointment , and says ,  Oh my gosh . 
Three different specialists had prescribed three different versions of the same drug to me .
I did not have a heart problem . I had an overdose problem .
I had a care coordination problem .
And this happens to millions of people every year .
I want to use technology that were all working on and making happen to make health care a coordinated team sport .
Now this is the most frightening thing to me .
Out of all the care Ive had in hospitals and clinics around the world , the first time Ive ever had a true team - based care experience was at Legacy Good Sam these last six months for me to go get this .
And this is a picture of my graduation team from Legacy .
Theres a couple of the folks here . Youll recognize Dr . Batiuk .
We just talked to him . Heres Jenny , one of the nurses , Allison , who helped manage the transplant list , and a dozen other people who arent pictured , a pharmacist , a psychologist , a nutritionist , even a financial counselor , Lisa , who helped us deal with all the insurance hassles .
I wept the day I graduated .
I should have been happy , because I was so well that I could go back to my normal doctors , but I wept because I was so actually connected to this team .
And heres the most important part .
The other people in this picture are me and my wife , Ashley .
Legacy trained us on how to do care for me at home so that they could offload the hospitals and clinics .
Thats the only way that the model works .
My team is actually working in China on one of these self - care models for a project we called Age - Friendly Cities .
Were trying to help build a social network that can help track and train the care of seniors caring for themselves as well as the care provided by their family members or volunteer community health workers , as well as have an exchange network online , where , for example , I can donate three hours of care a day to your mom , if somebody else can help me with transportation to meals , and we exchange all of that online .
The most important point I want to make to you about this is the sacred and somewhat over - romanticized doctor - patient one - on - one is a relic of the past .
The future of health care is smart teams , and youd better be on that team for yourself .
Now , the last thing that I want to talk to you about is care customization , because if youve got care anywhere and youve got care networking , those are going to go a long way towards improving our health care system , but theres still too much guesswork .
Randomized clinical trials were actually invented in 1948 to help invent the drugs that cured tuberculosis , and those are important things , dont get me wrong .
These population studies that weve done have created tons of miracle drugs that have saved millions of lives , but the problem is that health care is treating us as averages , not unique individuals , because at the end of the day , the patient is not the same thing as the population who are studied . Thats whats leading to the guesswork .
The technologies that are coming , high - performance computing , analytics , big data that everyones talking about , will allow us to build predictive models for each of us as individual patients .
And the magic here is , experiment on my avatar in software , not my body in suffering .
Now , Ive had two examples I want to quickly share with you of this kind of care customization on my own journey .
The first was quite simple . I finally realized some years ago that all my medical teams were optimizing my treatment for longevity .
Its like a badge of honor to see how long they can get the patient to live .
I was optimizing my life for quality of life , and quality of life for me means time in snow .
So on my chart , I forced them to put ,  Patient goal : low doses of drugs over longer periods of time , side effects friendly to skiing . 
And I think thats why I achieved longevity .
I think that time - in - snow therapy was as important as the pharmaceuticals that I had .
Now the second example of customization  -  -  and by the way , you cant customize care if you dont know your own goals , so health care cant know those until you know your own health care goals .
But the second example I want to give you is , I happened to be an early guinea pig , and I got very lucky to have my whole genome sequenced .
Now it took about two weeks of processing on Intels highest - end servers to make this happen , and another six months of human and computing labor to make sense of all of that data .
And at the end of all of that , they said ,  Yes , those diagnoses of that clash of medical titans all of those years ago were wrong , and we have a better path forward . 
The future that Intels working on now is to figure out how to make that computing for personalized medicine go from months and weeks to even hours , and make this kind of tool available , not just in the mainframes of tier - one research hospitals around the world , but in the mainstream  -  -  every patient , every clinic with access to whole genome sequencing .
And I tell you , this kind of care customization for everything from your goals to your genetics will be the most game - changing transformation that we witness in health care during our lifetime .
So these three pillars of personal health , care anywhere , care networking , care customization , are happening in pieces now , but this vision will completely fail if we dont step up as caregivers and as patients to take on new roles .
Its what my friend Verna said : Wake up and take control of your health .
Because at the end of the day these technologies are simply about people caring for other people and ourselves in some powerful new ways .
And its in that spirit that I want to introduce you to one last friend , very quickly .
Tracey Gamley stepped up to give me the impossible kidney that I was never supposed to have .
So Tracey , just tell us a little bit quickly about what the donor experience was like with you .
Tracey Gamley : For me , it was really easy .
I only had one night in the hospital .
The surgery was done laparoscopically , so I have just five very small scars on my abdomen , and I had four weeks away from work and went back to doing everything Id done before without any changes .
ED : Well , I probably will never get a chance to say this to you in such a large audience ever again .
So  thank you  feel likes a really trite word , but thank you from the bottom of my heart for saving my life .
This TED stage and all of the TED stages are often about celebrating innovation and celebrating new technologies , and Ive done that here today , and Ive seen amazing things coming from TED speakers , I mean , my gosh , artificial kidneys , even printable kidneys , that are coming .
But until such time that these amazing technologies are available to all of us , and even when they are , its up to us to care for , and even save , one another .
I hope you will go out and make personal health happen for yourselves and for everyone . Thanks so much .
Dennis Hong : My seven species of robot
Dennis Hong introduces seven award - winnning , all - terrain robots  -  -  like the humanoid , soccer - playing DARwIn and the cliff - gripping CLIMBeR  -  -  all built by his team at RoMeLa , Virginia Tech . Watch to the end to hear the five creative secrets to his labs incredible technical success .
So , the first robot to talk about is called STriDER .
It stands for Self - excited Tripedal Dynamic Experimental Robot .
Its a robot that has three legs , which is inspired by nature .
But have you seen anything in nature , an animal that has three legs ?
Probably not . So , why do I call this a biologically inspired robot ? How would it work ?
But before that , lets look at pop culture .
So , you know H.G . Wells  War of the Worlds ,  novel and movie .
And what you see over here is a very popular video game , and in this fiction they describe these alien creatures that are robots that have three legs that terrorize Earth .
But my robot , STriDER , does not move like this .
So , this is an actual dynamic simulation animation .
Im just going to show you how the robot works .
It flips its body 180 degrees and it swings its leg between the two legs and catches the fall .
So , thats how it walks . But when you look at us human being , bipedal walking , what youre doing is youre not really using a muscle to lift your leg and walk like a robot . Right ?
What youre doing is you really swing your leg and catch the fall , stand up again , swing your leg and catch the fall .
Youre using your built - in dynamics , the physics of your body , just like a pendulum .
We call that the concept of passive dynamic locomotion .
potential energy to kinetic energy , potential energy to kinetic energy .
Its a constantly falling process .
So , even though there is nothing in nature that looks like this , really , we were inspired by biology and applying the principles of walking to this robot . Thus its a biologically inspired robot .
What you see over here , this is what we want to do next .
We want to fold up the legs and shoot it up for long - range motion .
And it deploys legs  -  -  it looks almost like  Star Wars   -  -  when it lands , it absorbs the shock and starts walking .
What you see over here , this yellow thing , this is not a death ray .
This is just to show you that if you have cameras or different types of sensors  -  -  because it is tall , its 1.8 meters tall  -  -  you can see over obstacles like bushes and those kinds of things .
So we have two prototypes .
The first version , in the back , thats STriDER I .
The one in front , the smaller , is STriDER II .
The problem that we had with STriDER I is it was just too heavy in the body . We had so many motors , you know , aligning the joints , and those kinds of things .
So , we decided to synthesize a mechanical mechanism so we could get rid of all the motors , and with a single motor we can coordinate all the motions .
Its a mechanical solution to a problem , instead of using mechatronics .
So , with this now the top body is light enough . So , its walking in our lab ; this was the very first successful step .
Its still not perfected  -  -  its coffee falls down  -  -  so we still have a lot of work to do .
The second robot I want to talk about is called IMPASS .
It stands for Intelligent Mobility Platform with Actuated Spoke System .
So , its a wheel - leg hybrid robot .
So , think of a rimless wheel or a spoke wheel , but the spokes individually move in and out of the hub ; so , its a wheel - leg hybrid .
We are literally re - inventing the wheel here .
Let me demonstrate how it works .
So , in this video were using an approach called the reactive approach .
Just simply using the tactile sensors on the feet , its trying to walk over a changing terrain , a soft terrain where it pushes down and changes .
And just by the tactile information , it successfully crosses over these type of terrain .
But , when it encounters a very extreme terrain , in this case , this obstacle is more than three times the height of the robot , Then it switches to a deliberate mode , where it uses a laser range finder , and camera systems , to identify the obstacle and the size , and it plans , carefully plans the motion of the spokes and coordinates it so that it can show this kind of very very impressive mobility .
You probably havent seen anything like this out there .
This is a very high mobility robot that we developed called IMPASS .
Ah , isnt that cool ?
When you drive your car , when you steer your car , you use a method called Ackermann steering .
The front wheels rotate like this .
For most small wheeled robots , they use a method called differential steering where the left and right wheel turns the opposite direction .
For IMPASS , we can do many , many different types of motion .
For example , in this case , even though the left and right wheel is connected with a single axle rotating at the same angle of velocity .
We just simply change the length of the spoke .
It affects the diameter and then can turn to the left , turn to the right .
So , these are just some examples of the neat things that we can do with IMPASS .
This robot is called CLIMBeR : Cable - suspended Limbed Intelligent Matching Behavior Robot .
So , Ive been talking to a lot of NASA JPL scientists  -  -  at JPL they are famous for the Mars rovers  -  -  and the scientists , geologists always tell me that the real interesting science , the science - rich sites , are always at the cliffs .
But the current rovers can not get there .
So , inspired by that we wanted to build a robot that can climb a structured cliff environment .
So , this is CLIMBeR .
So , what it does , it has three legs . Its probably difficult to see , but it has a winch and a cable at the top  -  -  and it tries to figure out the best place to put its foot .
And then once it figures that out in real time , it calculates the force distribution : how much force it needs to exert to the surface so it doesnt tip and doesnt slip .
Once it stabilizes that , it lifts a foot , and then with the winch it can climb up these kinds of thing .
Also for search and rescue applications as well .
Five years ago I actually worked at NASA JPL during the summer as a faculty fellow .
And they already had a six legged robot called LEMUR .
So , this is actually based on that . This robot is called MARS : Multi - Appendage Robotic System . So , its a hexapod robot .
We developed our adaptive gait planner .
We actually have a very interesting payload on there .
The students like to have fun . And here you can see that its walking over unstructured terrain .
Its trying to walk on the coarse terrain , sandy area , but depending on the moisture content or the grain size of the sand the foots soil sinkage model changes .
So , it tries to adapt its gait to successfully cross over these kind of things .
And also , it does some fun stuff , as can imagine .
We get so many visitors visiting our lab .
So , when the visitors come , MARS walks up to the computer , starts typing  Hello , my name is MARS . 
Welcome to RoMeLa , the Robotics Mechanisms Laboratory at Virginia Tech .
This robot is an amoeba robot .
Now , we dont have enough time to go into technical details , Ill just show you some of the experiments .
So , this is some of the early feasibility experiments .
We store potential energy to the elastic skin to make it move .
Or use an active tension cords to make it move forward and backward . Its called ChIMERA .
We also have been working with some scientists and engineers from UPenn to come up with a chemically actuated version of this amoeba robot .
We do something to something And just like magic , it moves . The blob .
This robot is a very recent project . Its called RAPHaEL .
Robotic Air Powered Hand with Elastic Ligaments .
There are a lot of really neat , very good robotic hands out there in the market .
The problem is theyre just too expensive , tens of thousands of dollars .
So , for prosthesis applications its probably not too practical , because its not affordable .
We wanted to go tackle this problem in a very different direction .
Instead of using electrical motors , electromechanical actuators , were using compressed air .
We developed these novel actuators for joints .
It is compliant . You can actually change the force , simply just changing the air pressure .
And it can actually crush an empty soda can .
It can pick up very delicate objects like a raw egg , or in this case , a lightbulb .
The best part , it took only $ 200 dollars to make the first prototype .
This robot is actually a family of snake robots that we call HyDRAS , Hyper Degrees - of - freedom Robotic Articulated Serpentine .
This is a robot that can climb structures .
This is a HyDRASs arm .
Its a 12 degrees of freedom robotic arm .
But the cool part is the user interface .
The cable over there , thats an optical fiber .
And this student , probably the first time using it , but she can articulate it many different ways .
So , for example in Iraq , you know , the war zone , there is roadside bombs . Currently you send these remotely controlled vehicles that are armed .
It takes really a lot of time and its expensive to train the operator to operate this complex arm .
In this case its very intuitive ; this student , probably his first time using it , doing very complex manipulation tasks , picking up objects and doing manipulation , just like that . Very intuitive .
Now , this robot is currently our star robot .
We actually have a fan club for the robot , DARwIn : Dynamic Anthropomorphic Robot with Intelligence .
As you know , we are very interested in humanoid robot , human walking , so we decided to build a small humanoid robot .
This was in 2004 ; at that time , this was something really , really revolutionary .
This was more of a feasibility study : What kind of motors should we use ?
Is it even possible ? What kinds of controls should we do ?
So , this does not have any sensors .
So , its an open loop control .
For those who probably know , if you dont have any sensors and there are any disturbances , you know what happens .
So , based on that success , the following year we did the proper mechanical design starting from kinematics .
And thus , DARwIn I was born in 2005 .
It stands up , it walks  -  -  very impressive .
However , still , as you can see , it has a cord , umbilical cord . So , were still using an external power source and external computation .
So , in 2006 , now its really time to have fun .
Lets give it intelligence . We give it all the computing power it needs : a 1.5 gigahertz Pentium M chip , two FireWire cameras , rate gyros , accelerometers , four force sensors on the foot , lithium polymer batteries .
And now DARwIn II is completely autonomous .
It is not remote controlled .
There are no tethers . It looks around , searches for the ball , looks around , searches for the ball , and it tries to play a game of soccer , autonomously : artificial intelligence .
Lets see how it does . This was our very first trial , and ... Spectators : Goal !
Dennis Hong : So , there is actually a competition called RoboCup .
I dont know how many of you have heard about RoboCup .
Its an international autonomous robot soccer competition .
And the goal of RoboCup , the actual goal is , by the year 2050 we want to have full size , autonomous humanoid robots play soccer against the human World Cup champions and win .
Its a true actual goal . Its a very ambitious goal , but we truly believe that we can do it .
So , this is last year in China .
We were the very first team in the United States that qualified in the humanoid RoboCup competition .
This is this year in Austria .
Youre going to see the action , three against three , completely autonomous .
There you go . Yes !
The robots track and they team play amongst themselves .
Its very impressive . Its really a research event packaged in a more exciting competition event .
Louis Vuitton Cup trophy .
So , this is for the best humanoid , and we would like to bring this for the very first time , to the United States next year , so wish us luck .
Thank you .
DARwIn also has a lot of other talents .
Last year it actually conducted the Roanoke Symphony Orchestra for the holiday concert .
This is the next generation robot , DARwIn IV , but smarter , faster , stronger .
And its trying to show off its ability :  Im macho , Im strong .
I can also do some Jackie Chan - motion , martial art movements . 
And it walks away . So , this is DARwIn IV .
And again , youll be able to see it in the lobby .
We truly believe this is going to be the very first running humanoid robot in the United States . So , stay tuned .
All right . So I showed you some of our exciting robots at work .
So , what is the secret of our success ?
Where do we come up with these ideas ?
How do we develop these kinds of ideas ?
We have a fully autonomous vehicle that can drive into urban environments . We won a half a million dollars in the DARPA Urban Challenge .
We also have the worlds very first vehicle that can be driven by the blind .
We call it the Blind Driver Challenge , very exciting .
And many , many other robotics projects I want to talk about .
These are just the awards that we won in 2007 fall from robotics competitions and those kinds of things .
So , really , we have five secrets .
First is : Where do we get inspiration ?
Where do we get this spark of imagination ?
This is a true story , my personal story .
At night when I go to bed , 3  -  4 a.m . in the morning , I lie down , close my eyes , and I see these lines and circles and different shapes floating around .
And they assemble , and they form these kinds of mechanisms .
And then I think ,  Ah this is cool . 
So , right next to my bed I keep a notebook , a journal , with a special pen that has a light on it , LED light , because I dont want to turn on the light and wake up my wife .
So , I see this , scribble everything down , draw things , and I go to bed .
Every day in the morning , the first thing I do before my first cup of coffee , before I brush my teeth , I open my notebook .
Many times its empty , sometimes I have something there  -  -  if somethings there , sometimes its junk  -  -  but most of the time I cant even read my handwriting .
And so , 4 am in the morning , what do you expect , right ?
So , I need to decipher what I wrote .
But sometimes I see this ingenious idea in there , and I have this eureka moment .
I directly run to my home office , sit at my computer , I type in the ideas , I sketch things out and I keep a database of ideas .
So , when we have these calls for proposals , I try to find a match between my potential ideas and the problem . If there is a match we write a research proposal , get the research funding in , and thats how we start our research programs .
But just a spark of imagination is not good enough .
How do we develop these kinds of ideas ?
At our lab RoMeLa , the Robotics and Mechanisms Laboratory , we have these fantastic brainstorming sessions .
So , we gather around , we discuss about problems and social problems and talk about it .
But before we start we set this golden rule .
The rule is : Nobody criticizes anybodys ideas .
Nobody criticizes any opinion .
This is important , because many times students , they fear or they feel uncomfortable how others might think about their opinions and thoughts .
So , once you do this , it is amazing how the students open up .
They have these wacky , cool , crazy , brilliant ideas , and the whole room is just electrified with creative energy .
And this is how we develop our ideas .
Well , were running out of time . One more thing I want to talk about is , you know , just a spark of idea and development is not good enough .
There was a great TED moment , I think it was Sir Ken Robinson , was it ?
He gave a talk about how education and school kills creativity .
Well , actually , there are two sides to the story .
So , there is only so much one can do with just ingenious ideas and creativity and good engineering intuition .
If you want to go beyond a tinkering , if you want to go beyond a hobby of robotics and really tackle the grand challenges of robotics through rigorous research we need more than that . This is where school comes in .
Batman , fighting against bad guys , he has his utility belt , he has his grappling hook , he has all different kinds of gadgets .
For us roboticists , engineers and scientists , these tools , these are the courses and classes you take in class .
Math , differential equations .
I have linear algebra , science , physics , even nowadays , chemistry and biology , as youve seen .
These are all the tools that we need .
So , the more tools you have , for Batman , more effective at fighting the bad guys , for us , more tools to attack these kinds of big problems .
So , education is very important .
Also , its not about that , only about that . You also have to work really , really hard .
So , I always tell my students ,  Work smart , then work hard . 
This picture in the back this is 3 a.m . in the morning .
I guarantee if you come to your lab at 3  -  4 am we have students working there , not because I tell them to , but because we are having too much fun .
Which leads to the last topic : Do not forget to have fun .
Thats really the secret of our success , were having too much fun .
I truly believe that highest productivity comes when youre having fun , and thats what were doing .
There you go . Thank you so much .
Mikko Hypponen : Fighting viruses , defending the net
Its been 25 years since the first PC virus hit the net , and what was once an annoyance has become a sophisticated tool for crime and espionage . Computer security expert Mikko Hyppönen tells us how we can stop these new viruses from threatening the internet as we know it .
I love the Internet .
Its true .
Think about everything it has brought us .
Think about all the services we use , all the connectivity , all the entertainment , all the business , all the commerce .
And its happening during our lifetimes .
Im pretty sure that one day well be writing history books hundreds of years from now . This time our generation will be remembered as the generation that got online , the generation that built something really and truly global .
But yes , its also true that the Internet has problems , very serious problems , problems with security and problems with privacy .
Ive spent my career fighting these problems .
So let me show you something .
This here is Brain .
This is a floppy disk  -  -  five and a quarter - inch floppy disk infected by Brain . A .
Its the first virus we ever found for PC computers .
And we actually know where Brain came from .
We know because it says so inside the code .
Lets take a look .
All right .
Thats the boot sector of an infected floppy , and if we take a closer look inside , well see that right there , it says ,  Welcome to the dungeon . 
And then it continues , saying , 1986 , Basit and Amjad .
And Basit and Amjad are first names , Pakistani first names .
In fact , theres a phone number and an address in Pakistan .
Now , 1986 .
Now its 2011 .
Thats 25 years ago .
The PC virus problem is 25 years old now .
So half a year ago , I decided to go to Pakistan myself .
So lets see , heres a couple of photos I took while I was in Pakistan .
This is from the city of Lahore , which is around 300 kilometers south from Abbottabad , where Bin Laden was caught .
Heres a typical street view .
And heres the street or road leading to this building , which is 730 Nizam block at Allama Iqbal Town .
And I knocked on the door .
You want to guess who opened the door ?
Basit and Amjad ; they are still there .
So here standing up is Basit .
Sitting down is his brother Amjad .
These are the guys who wrote the first PC virus .
Now of course , we had a very interesting discussion .
I asked them why .
I asked them how they feel about what they started .
And I got some sort of satisfaction from learning that both Basit and Amjad had had their computers infected dozens of times by completely unrelated other viruses over these years .
So there is some sort of justice in the world after all .
Now , the viruses that we used to see in the 1980s and 1990s obviously are not a problem any more .
So let me just show you a couple of examples of what they used to look like .
What Im running here is a system that enables me to run age - old programs on a modern computer .
So let me just mount some drives . Go over there .
What we have here is a list of old viruses .
So let me just run some viruses on my computer .
For example , lets go with the Centipede virus first .
And you can see at the top of the screen , theres a centipede scrolling across your computer when you get infected by this one .
You know that youre infected because it actually shows up .
Heres another one . This is the virus called Crash , invented in Russia in 1992 .
Let me show you one which actually makes some sound .
And the last example , guess what the Walker virus does ?
Yes , theres a guy walking across your screen once you get infected .
So it used to be fairly easy to know that youre infected by a virus , when the viruses were written by hobbyists and teenagers .
Today , they are no longer being written by hobbyists and teenagers .
Today , viruses are a global problem .
What we have here in the background is an example of our systems that we run in our labs , where we track virus infections worldwide .
So we can actually see in real time that weve just blocked viruses in Sweden and Taiwan and Russia and elsewhere .
In fact , if I just connect back to our lab systems through the Web , we can see in real time just some kind of idea of how many viruses , how many new examples of malware we find every single day .
Heres the latest virus weve found , in a file called Server . exe .
And we found it right over here three seconds ago  -  -  the previous one , six seconds ago .
And if we just scroll around , its just massive .
We find tens of thousands , even hundreds of thousands .
And thats the last 20 minutes of malware every single day .
So where are all these coming from then ?
Well today , its the organized criminal gangs writing these viruses because they make money with their viruses .
Its gangs like  -  -  lets go to GangstaBucks.com .
This is a website operating in Moscow where these guys are buying infected computers .
So if you are a virus writer and youre capable of infecting Windows computers , but you dont know what to do with them , you can sell those infected computers  -  -  somebody elses computers  -  -  to these guys .
And theyll actually pay you money for those computers .
So how do these guys then monetize those infected computers ?
Well theres multiple different ways , such as banking trojans , which will steal money from your online banking accounts when you do online banking , or keyloggers .
Keyloggers silently sit on your computer , hidden from view , and they record everything you type .
So youre sitting on your computer and youre doing Google searches .
Every single Google search you type is saved and sent to the criminals .
Every single email you write is saved and sent to the criminals .
Same thing with every single password and so on .
But the thing that theyre actually looking for most are sessions where you go online and do online purchases in any online store .
Because when you do purchases in online stores , you will be typing in your name , the delivery address , your credit card number and the credit card security codes .
And heres an example of a file we found from a server a couple of weeks ago .
Thats the credit card number , thats the expiration date , thats the security code , and thats the name of the owner of the card .
Once you gain access to other peoples credit card information , you can just go online and buy whatever you want with this information .
And that , obviously , is a problem .
We now have a whole underground marketplace and business ecosystem built around online crime .
One example of how these guys actually are capable of monetizing their operations : we go and have a look at the pages of INTERPOL and search for wanted persons .
We find guys like Bjorn Sundin , originally from Sweden , and his partner in crime , also listed on the INTERPOL wanted pages , Mr. Shaileshkumar Jain , a U.S . citizen .
These guys were running an operation called I . M . U . , a cybercrime operation through which they netted millions .
They are both right now on the run .
Nobody knows where they are .
U.S . officials , just a couple of weeks ago , froze a Swiss bank account belonging to Mr. Jain , and that bank account had 14.9 million U.S . dollars on it .
So the amount of money online crime generates is significant .
And that means that the online criminals can actually afford to invest into their attacks .
We know that online criminals are hiring programmers , hiring testing people , testing their code , having back - end systems with SQL databases .
And they can afford to watch how we work  -  -  like how security people work  -  -  and try to work their way around any security precautions we can build .
They also use the global nature of Internet to their advantage .
I mean , the Internet is international .
Thats why we call it the Internet .
And if you just go and take a look at whats happening in the online world , heres a video built by Clarified Networks , which illustrates how one single malware family is able to move around the world .
This operation , believed to be originally from Estonia , moves around from one country to another as soon as the website is tried to shut down .
So you just cant shut these guys down .
They will switch from one country to another , from one jurisdiction to another  -  -  moving around the world , using the fact that we dont have the capability to globally police operations like this .
So the Internet is as if someone would have given free plane tickets to all the online criminals of the world .
Now , criminals who werent capable of reaching us before can reach us .
So how do you actually go around finding online criminals ?
How do you actually track them down ?
Let me give you an example .
What we have here is one exploit file .
Here , Im looking at the Hex dump of an image file , which contains an exploit .
And that basically means , if youre trying to view this image file on your Windows computer , it actually takes over your computer and runs code .
Now , if youll take a look at this image file  -  -  well theres the image header , and there the actual code of the attack starts .
And that code has been encrypted , so lets decrypt it .
It has been encrypted with XOR function 97 .
You just have to believe me , it is , it is .
And we can go here and actually start decrypting it .
Well the yellow part of the code is now decrypted .
And I know , it doesnt really look much different from the original .
But just keep staring at it .
Youll actually see that down here you can see a Web address : unionseek.com / d / ioo.exe And when you view this image on your computer it actually is going to download and run that program .
And thats a backdoor which will take over your computer .
But even more interestingly , if we continue decrypting , well find this mysterious string , which says O600KO78RUS .
That code is there underneath the encryption as some sort of a signature .
Its not used for anything .
And I was looking at that , trying to figure out what it means .
So obviously I Googled for it .
I got zero hits ; wasnt there .
So I spoke with the guys at the lab .
And we have a couple of Russian guys in our labs , and one of them mentioned , well , it ends in RUS like Russia .
And 78 is the city code For example , you can find it from some phone numbers and car license plates and stuff like that .
So I went looking for contacts in St . Petersburg , and through a long road , we eventually found this one particular website .
Heres this Russian guy whos been operating online for a number of years who runs his own website , and he runs a blog under the popular Live Journal .
And on this blog , he blogs about his life , about his life in St . Petersburg  -  -  hes in his early 20s  -  -  about his cat , about his girlfriend .
And he drives a very nice car .
In fact , this guy drives a Mercedes - Benz S600 V12 with a six - liter engine with more than 400 horsepower .
Now thats a nice car for a 20 - something year - old kid in St . Petersburg .
How do I know about this car ?
Because he blogged about the car .
He actually had a car accident .
In downtown St . Petersburg , he actually crashed his car into another car .
And he put blogged images about the car accident  -  -  thats his Mercedes  -  -  right here is the Lada Samara he crashed into .
And you can actually see that the license plate of the Samara ends in 78RUS .
And if you actually take a look at the scene picture , you can see that the plate of the Mercedes is O600KO78RUS .
Now Im not a lawyer , but if I would be , this is where I would say ,  I rest my case . 
So what happens when online criminals are caught ?
Well in most cases it never gets this far .
The vast majority of the online crime cases , we dont even know which continent the attacks are coming from .
And even if we are able to find online criminals , quite often there is no outcome .
The local police dont act , or if they do , theres not enough evidence , or for some reason we cant take them down .
I wish it would be easier ; unfortunately it isnt .
But things are also changing at a very rapid pace .
Youve all heard about things like Stuxnet .
So if you look at what Stuxnet did is that it infected these .
Thats a Siemens S7 - 400 PLC , programmable logic  controller  .
And this is what runs our infrastructure .
This is what runs everything around us .
PLCs , these small boxes which have no display , no keyboard , which are programmed , are put in place , and they do their job .
For example , the elevators in this building most likely are controlled by one of these .
And when Stuxnet infects one of these , thats a massive revolution on the kinds of risks we have to worry about .
Because everything around us is being run by these .
I mean , we have critical infrastructure .
You go to any factory , any power plant , any chemical plant , any food processing plant , you look around  -  -  everything is being run by computers .
Everything is being run by computers .
Everything is reliant on these computers working .
We have become very reliant on Internet , on basic things like electricity , obviously , on computers working .
And this really is something which creates completely new problems for us .
We must have some way of continuing to work even if computers fail .
So preparedness means that we can do stuff even when the things we take for granted arent there .
Its actually very basic stuff  -  -  thinking about continuity , thinking about backups , thinking about the things that actually matter .
Now I told you  -  -  I love the Internet . I do .
Think about all the services we have online .
Think about if they are taken away from you , if one day you dont actually have them for some reason or another .
I see beauty in the future of the Internet , but Im worried that we might not see that .
Im worried that we are running into problems because of online crime .
Online crime is the one thing that might take these things away from us .
Ive spent my life defending the Net , and I do feel that if we dont fight online crime , we are running a risk of losing it all .
We have to do this globally , and we have to do it right now .
What we need is more global , international law enforcement work to find online criminal gangs  -  -  these organized gangs that are making millions out of their attacks .
Thats much more important than running anti - viruses or running firewalls .
What actually matters is actually finding the people behind these attacks , and even more importantly , we have to find the people who are about to become part of this online world of crime , but havent yet done it .
We have to find the people with the skills , but without the opportunities and give them the opportunities to use their skills for good .
Thank you very much .
Rogier van der Heide : Why light needs darkness
Lighting architect Rogier van der Heide offers a beautiful new way to look at the world  -  -  by paying attention to light . Examples from classic buildings illustrate a deeply thought - out vision of the play of light around us . 
Theres a beautiful statement on the screen that says ,  Light creates ambiance , light makes the feel of a space , and light is also the expression of structure . 
Well that was not by me .
That was , of course , by Le Corbusier , the famous architect .
And here you can see what he meant in one of his beautiful buildings  -  -  the chapel Notre Dame du Haut , Ronchamp  -  -  where he creates this light that he could only make because theres also dark .
And I think that is the quintessence of this 18 - minute talk  -  -  that there is no good lighting that is healthy and for our well - being without proper darkness .
So this is how we normally would light our offices .
We have codes and standards that tell us that the lights should be so much lux and of great uniformity .
This is how we create uniform lighting from one wall to the other in a regular grid of lamps .
And that is quite different from what I just showed you from Le Corbusier .
If we would apply these codes and standards to the Pantheon in Rome , it would never have looked like this , because this beautiful light feature that goes around there all by itself can only appear because there is also darkness in that same building .
And the same is more or less what Santiago Calatrava said when he said ,  Light : I make it in my buildings for comfort . 
And he didnt mean the comfort of a five - course dinner as opposed to a one - course meal , but he really meant the comfort of the quality of the building for the people .
He meant that you can see the sky and that you can experience the sun .
And he created these gorgeous buildings where you can see the sky , and where you can experience the sun , that give us a better life in the built environment , just because of the relevance of light in its brightness and also in its shadows .
What it all boils down to is , of course , the sun .
And this image of the sun may suggest that the sun is something evil and aggressive , but we should not forget that all energy on this planet actually comes from the sun , and light is only a manifestation of that energy .
The sun is for dynamics , for color changes .
The sun is for beauty in our environment , like in this building  -  -  the High Museum in Atlanta , which has been created by Renzo Piano from Italy , together with Arup Lighting , a brilliant team of lighting designers , who created a very subtle modulation of light across the space , responding to what the sun does outside , just because of all these beautiful openings in the roof .
So in an indirect way , you can see the sun .
And what they did is they created an integral building element to improve the quality of the space that surrounds the visitors of the museum .
They created this shade that you can see here , which actually covers the sun , but opens up to the good light from the sky .
And here you can see how they really crafted a beautiful design process with physical models , with quantitative , as well as qualitative , methods to come to a final solution that is truly integrated and completely holistic with the architecture .
They allowed themselves a few mistakes along the way .
As you can see here , theres some direct light on the floor , but they could easily figure out where that comes from .
And they allow people in that building to really enjoy the sun , the good part of the sun .
And enjoying the sun can be in many different ways , of course .
It can be just like this , or maybe like this , which is rather peculiar , but this is in 1963  -  -  the viewing of a sun eclipse in the United States .
And its just a bit bright up there , so these people have found a very intriguing solution .
This is , I think , a very illustrative image of what I try to say  -  -  that the beautiful dynamics of sun , bringing these into the building , creates a quality of our built environment that truly enhances our lives .
And this is all about darkness as much as it is about lightness , of course , because otherwise you dont see these dynamics .
As opposed to the first office that I showed you in the beginning of the talk , this is a well - known office , which is the White Group .
They are in green energy consulting , or something like that .
And they really practice what they preach because this office doesnt have any electric lighting at all .
It has only on one side this big , big glass window that helps to let the sunlight enter deep into the space and create a beautiful quality there and a great dynamic range .
So it can be very dim over there , and you do your work , and it can be very bright over there , and you do your work .
But actually the human eye turns out to be remarkably adaptable to all these different light conditions that together create an environment that is never boring and that is never dull , and therefore helps us to enhance our lives .
I really owe a short introduction of this man to you .
This is Richard Kelly who was born 100 years ago , which is the reason I bring him up now , because its kind of an anniversary year .
In the 1930s , Richard Kelly was the first person to really describe a methodology of modern lighting design .
And he coined three terms , which are  focal glow ,   ambient luminescence  and  play of the brilliants   -  -  three very distinctly different ideas about light in architecture that all together make up this beautiful experience .
So you begin with focal glow .
He meant something like this  -  -  where the light gives direction to the space and helps you to get around .
Or something like this , which is the lighting design he did for General Motors , for the car showroom .
And you enter that space , and you feel like ,  Wow ! This is so impressive ,  just because of this focal point , this huge light source in the middle .
To me it is something from theatre , and I will get back to that a little bit later .
Its the spotlight on the artist that helps you to focus .
It could also be the sunlight that breaks through the clouds and lights up a patch of the land , highlighting it compared to the dim environment .
Or it can be in todays retail , in the shopping environment  -  -  lighting the merchandise and creating accents that help you to get around .
Ambient luminescence is something very different .
Richard Kelly saw it as something infinite , something without any focus , something where all details actually dissolve in infinity .
And I see it as a very comfortable kind of light that really helps us to relax and to contemplate .
It could also be something like this : the National Museum of Science in London , where this blue is embracing all the exhibitions and galleries in one large gesture .
And then finally , Kellys play of brilliants attitude , that really some play of the skyline of Hong Kong , or perhaps the chandelier in the opera house , or in the theater here , which is a decoration , the icing on the cake , something playful , something that is just an addition to the architectural environment , I would say .
These three distinct elements , together , make a lighting environment that helps us to feel better .
And we can only create these out of darkness .
And I will explain that further .
And I guess that is something that Richard Kelly , here on the left , was explaining to Ludwig Mies Van der Rohe .
And behind them , you see that Seagram Building that later turned into an icon of modern lighting design .
Those times , there were some early attempts also for light therapy already .
You can see here a photo from the United States Library of Medicine , where people are put in the sun to get better .
Its a little bit of a different story , this health aspect of light , than what Im telling you today .
In todays modern medicine , there is a real understanding of light in an almost biochemical way .
And there is the idea that , when we look at things , it is the yellow light that helps us the most , that we are the most sensitive for .
But our circadian rhythms , which are the rhythms that help us to wake and sleep and be alert and relaxed and so forth and so on , they are much more triggered by blue light .
And by modulating the amount of blue in our environment , we can help people to relax , or to be alert , to fall asleep , or to stay awake .
And that is how , maybe in the near future , light can help hospitals to make people better sooner , recover them quicker .
Maybe in the airplane , we can overcome jet lag like that .
Perhaps in school , we can help children to learn better because they concentrate more on their work .
And you can imagine a lot more applications .
But I would like to talk further about the combination of light and darkness as a quality in our life .
So light is , of course , for social interaction also  -  -  to create relationships with all the features around us .
It is the place where we gather around when we have to say something to each other .
And it is all about this planet .
But when you look at this planet at night , it looks like this .
And I think this is the most shocking image in my talk today .
Because all this light here goes up to the sky .
It never reaches the ground where it was meant for .
It never is to the benefit of people .
It only spoils the darkness .
So at a global scale , it looks like this .
And , I mean , that is quite amazing , what you see here  -  -  how much light goes up into the sky and never reaches the ground .
Because if we look at the Earth the way it should be , it would be something like this very inspiring image where darkness is for our imagination and for contemplation and to help us to relate to everything .
The world is changing though , and urbanization is a big driver of everything .
I took this photo two weeks ago in Guangzhou , and I realized that 10 years ago , there was nothing like this , of these buildings .
It was just a much smaller city , and the pace of urbanization is incredible and enormous .
And we have to understand these main questions : How do people move through these new urban spaces ?
How do they share their culture ?
How do we tackle things like mobility ?
And how can light help there ?
Because the new technologies , they seem to be in a really interesting position to contribute to the solutions of urbanization and to provide us with better environments .
Its not that long ago that our lighting was just done with these kinds of lamps .
And of course , we had the metal halide lamps and fluorescent lamps and things like that .
Now we have LED , but here you see the latest one , and you see how incredibly small it is .
And this is exactly what offers us a unique opportunity because this tiny , tiny size allows us to put the light wherever we really need it .
And we can actually leave it out where its not needed at all and where we can preserve darkness .
So that is a really interesting proposition , I think , and a new way of lighting the architectural environment with our well - being in mind .
The problem is though that I wanted to explain to you how this really works  -  -  but I can have four of these on my finger , so you would not to be able to really see them .
So I asked our laboratory to do something about it , and they said ,  Well , we can do something . 
They created for me the biggest LED in the world especially for TEDx in Amsterdam .
So here it is .
Its the same thing as you can see over there  -  -  just 200 times bigger .
And I will very quickly show you how it works .
So just to explain .
Now , every LED that is made these days gives blue light .
Now this is not very pleasant and comfortable .
And for that reason , we cover the LED with a phosphor cap .
And the phosphor is excited by the blue and makes the light white and warm and pleasant .
And then when you add the lens to that , you can bundle the light and send it to wherever you need it without any need to spill any light to the sky or anywhere else .
So you can preserve the darkness and make the light .
I just wanted to show that to you so you understand how this works .
Thank you .
We can go further .
So we have to rethink the way we light our cities .
We have to think again about light as a default solution .
Why are all these motorways permanently lit ?
Is it really needed ?
Can we maybe be much more selective and create better environments that also benefit from darkness ?
Can we be more gentle with light ?
Like here  -  -  this is a very low light level actually .
Can we engage people more in the lighting projects that we create , so they really want to connect with it , like here ?
Or can we create simply sculptures that are very inspiring to be in and to be around ?
And can we preserve the darkness ?
Because to find a place like this today on Earth is really very , very challenging .
And to find a starry sky like this is even more difficult .
Even in the oceans , we are creating a lot of light that we could actually ban also for animal life to have a much greater well - being .
And its known that migrating birds , for example , get very disoriented because of these offshore platforms .
And we discovered that , when we make those lights green , the birds , they actually go the right way .
They are not disturbed anymore .
And it turns out once again that spectral sensitivity is very important here .
In all of these examples , I think , we should start making the light out of darkness , and use the darkness as a canvas  -  -  like the visual artists do , like Edward Hopper in this painting .
I think that there is a lot of suspense in this painting .
I think , when I see it , I start to think , who are those people ?
Where have they come from ? Where are they going ?
What just happened ? What will be happening in the next five minutes ?
And it only embodies all these stories and all this suspense because of the darkness and the light .
Edward Hopper was a real master in creating the narration by working with light and dark .
And we can learn from that and create more interesting and inspiring architectural environments .
We can do that in commercial spaces like this .
And you can still also go outside and enjoy the greatest show in the universe , which is , of course , the universe itself .
So I give you this wonderful , informative image of the sky , ranging from the inner city , where you may see one or two stars and nothing else , all the way to the rural environments , where you can enjoy this great and gorgeous and beautiful performance of the constellations and the stars .
In architecture , it works just the same .
By appreciating the darkness when you design the light , you create much more interesting environments that truly enhance our lives .
This is the most well - known example , Tadao Andos Church of Light .
But I also think of Peter Zumthors spa in Vals , where light and dark , in very gentle combinations , alter each other to define the space .
Or Richard McCormacks Southern tube station in London , where you can really see the sky , even though you are under the ground .
And finally I want to point out that a lot of this inspiration comes from theater .
And I think its fantastic that we are today experiencing TEDx in a theater for the first time because I think we really owe to the theater a big thanks .
It wouldnt be such an inspiring scenography without this theater .
And I think the theater is a place where we truly enhance life with light .
Thank you very much .
Eva Zeisel : The playful search for beauty
The ceramics designer Eva Zeisel looks back on a 75 - year career . What keeps her work as fresh today as in 1926 ? Her sense of play and beauty , and her drive for adventure . Listen for stories from a rich , colorful life .
So I understand that this meeting was planned , and the slogan was From Was to Still .
And I am illustrating Still .
Which , of course , I am not agreeing with because , although I am 94 , I am not still working .
And anybody who asks me ,  Are you still doing this or that ? 
I dont answer because Im not doing things still , Im doing it like I always did .
I still have  -  -  or did I use the word still ? I didnt mean that .
I have my file which is called To Do . I have my plans .
I have my clients . I am doing my work like I always did .
So this takes care of my age .
I want to show you my work so you know what I am doing and why I am here .
This was about 1925 .
All of these things were made during the last 75 years .
But , of course , Im working since 25 , doing more or less what you see here . This is Castleton China .
This was an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art .
This is now for sale at the Metropolitan Museum .
This is still at the Metropolitan Museum now for sale .
This is a portrait of my daughter and myself .
These were just some of the things Ive made .
I made hundreds of them for the last 75 years .
I call myself a maker of things .
I dont call myself an industrial designer because Im other things .
Industrial designers want to make novel things .
Novelty is a concept of commerce , not an aesthetic concept .
The industrial design magazine , I believe , is called  Innovation . 
Innovation is not part of the aim of my work .
Well , makers of things : they make things more beautiful , more elegant , more comfortable than just the craftsmen do .
I have so much to say . I have to think what I am going to say .
Well , to describe our profession otherwise , we are actually concerned with the playful search for beauty .
That means the playful search for beauty was called the first activity of Man .
Sarah Smith , who was a mathematics professor at MIT , wrote ,  The playful search for beauty was Mans first activity  -  -  that all useful qualities and all material qualities were developed from the playful search for beauty . 
These are tiles . The word ,  playful  is a necessary aspect of our work because , actually , one of our problems is that we have to make , produce , lovely things throughout all of life , and this for me is now 75 years .
So how can you , without drying up , make things with the same pleasure , as a gift to others , for so long ?
The playful is therefore an important part of our quality as designer .
Let me tell you some about my life .
As I said , I started to do these things 75 years ago .
My first exhibition in the United States was at the Sesquicentennial exhibition in 1926  -  -  that the Hungarian government sent one of my hand - drawn pieces as part of the exhibit .
My work actually took me through many countries , and showed me a great part of the world .
This is not that they took me  -  -  the work didnt take me  -  -  I made the things particularly because I wanted to use them to see the world .
I was incredibly curious to see the world , and I made all these things , which then finally did take me to see many countries and many cultures .
I started as an apprentice to a Hungarian craftsman , and this taught me what the guild system was in Middle Ages .
The guild system : that means when I was an apprentice , I had to apprentice myself in order to become a pottery master .
In my shop where I studied , or learned , there was a traditional hierarchy of master , journeyman and learned worker , and apprentice , and I worked as the apprentice .
The work as an apprentice was very primitive .
That means I had to actually learn every aspect of making pottery by hand .
We mashed the clay with our feet when it came from the hillside .
After that , it had to be kneaded . It had to then go in , kind of , a mangle .
And then finally it was prepared for the throwing .
And there I really worked as an apprentice .
My master took me to set ovens because this was part of oven - making , oven - setting , in the time .
And finally , I had received a document that I had accomplished my apprenticeship successfully , that I had behaved morally , and this document was given to me by the Guild of Roof - Coverers , Rail - Diggers , Oven - Setters , Chimney Sweeps and Potters .
I also got at the time a workbook which explained my rights and my working conditions , and I still have that workbook .
First I set up a shop in my own garden , and made pottery which I sold on the marketplace in Budapest .
And there I was sitting , and my then - boyfriend  -  -  I didnt mean it was a boyfriend like it is meant today  -  -  but my boyfriend and I sat at the market and sold the pots .
My mother thought that this was not very proper , so she sat with us to add propriety to this activity .
However , after a while there was a new factory being built in Budapest , a pottery factory , a large one .
And I visited it with several ladies , and asked all sorts of questions of the director .
Then the director asked me , why do you ask all these questions ?
I said , I also have a pottery .
So he asked me , could he please visit me , and then finally he did , and explained to me that what I did now in my shop was an anachronism , that the industrial revolution had broken out , and that I rather should join the factory .
There he made an art department for me where I worked for several months .
However , everybody in the factory spent his time at the art department .
The director there said there were several women casting and producing my designs now in molds , and this was sold also to America .
I remember that it was quite successful .
However , the director , the chemist , model maker  -  -  everybody  -  -  concerned himself much more with the art department  -  -  that means , with my work  -  -  than making toilets , so finally they got a letter from the center , from the bank who owned the factory , saying , make toilet - setting behind the art department , and that was my end .
So this gave me the possibility because now I was a journeyman , and journeymen also take their satchel and go to see the world .
So as a journeyman , I put an ad into the paper that I had studied , that I was a down - to - earth potters journeyman and I was looking for a job as a journeyman .
And I got several answers , and I accepted the one which was farthest from home and practically , I thought , halfway to America .
And that was in Hamburg .
Then I first took this job in Hamburg , at an art pottery where everything was done on the wheel , and so I worked in a shop where there were several potters .
And the first day , I was coming to take my place at the turntable  -  -  there were three or four turntables  -  -  and one of them , behind where I was sitting , was a hunchback , a deaf - mute hunchback , who smelled very bad .
So I doused him in cologne every day , which he thought was very nice , and therefore he brought bread and butter every day , which I had to eat out of courtesy .
The first day I came to work in this shop there was on my wheel a surprise for me .
My colleagues had thoughtfully put on the wheel where I was supposed to work a very nicely modeled natural mans organs .
After I brushed them off with a hand motion , they were very  -  -  I finally was now accepted , and worked there for some six months .
This was my first job .
If I go on like this , you will be here till midnight .
So I will try speed it up a little Moderator : Eva , we have about five minutes .
Eva Zeisel : Are you sure ?
Moderator : Yes , I am sure .
EZ : Well , if you are sure , I have to tell you that within five minutes I will talk very fast .
And actually , my work took me to many countries because I used my work to fill my curiosity .
And among other things , other countries I worked , was in the Soviet Union , where I worked from 32 to 37  -  -  actually , to 36 .
I was finally there , although I had nothing to do  -  -  I was a foreign expert .
I became art director of the china and glass industry , and eventually under Stalins purges  -  -  at the beginning of Stalins purges , I didnt know that hundreds of thousands of innocent people were arrested .
So I was arrested quite early in Stalins purges , and spent 16 months in a Russian prison .
The accusation was that I had successfully prepared an Attentat on Stalins life .
This was a very dangerous accusation .
And if this is the end of my five minutes , I want to tell you that I actually did survive , which was a surprise .
But since I survived and Im here , and since this is the end of the five minutes , I will  -  -  Moderator : Tell me when your last trip to Russia was .
Werent you there recently ?
EZ : Oh , this summer , in fact , the Lomonosov factory was bought by an American company , invited me .
They found out that I had worked in 33 at this factory , and they came to my studio in Rockland County , and brought the 15 of their artists to visit me here .
And they invited myself to come to the Russian factory last summer , in July , to make some dishes , design some dishes .
And since I dont like to travel alone , they also invited my daughter , son - in - law and granddaughter , so we had a lovely trip to see Russia today , which is not a very pleasant and happy view .
Here I am now , if this is the end ? Thank you .
Bonnie Bassler : How bacteria  talk 
Bonnie Bassler discovered that bacteria  talk  to each other , using a chemical language that lets them coordinate defense and mount attacks . The find has stunning implications for medicine , industry  -  -  and our understanding of ourselves .
Bacteria are the oldest living organisms on the earth .
Theyve been here for billions of years , and what they are are single - celled microscopic organisms .
So they are one cell and they have this special property that they only have one piece of DNA .
They have very few genes , and genetic information to encode all of the traits that they carry out .
And the way bacteria make a living is that they consume nutrients from the environment , they grow to twice their size , they cut themselves down in the middle , and one cell becomes two , and so on and so on .
They just grow and divide , and grow and divide  -  -  so a kind of boring life , except that what I would argue is that you have an amazing interaction with these critters .
I know you guys think of yourself as humans , and this is sort of how I think of you .
This man is supposed to represent a generic human being , and all of the circles in that man are all of the cells that make up your body .
There is about a trillion human cells that make each one of us who we are and able to do all the things that we do , but you have 10 trillion bacterial cells in you or on you at any moment in your life .
So , 10 times more bacterial cells than human cells on a human being .
And of course its the DNA that counts , so heres all the A , T , Gs and Cs that make up your genetic code , and give you all your charming characteristics .
You have about 30,000 genes .
Well it turns out you have 100 times more bacterial genes playing a role in you or on you all of your life .
At the best , youre 10 percent human , but more likely about one percent human , depending on which of these metrics you like .
I know you think of yourself as human beings , but I think of you as 90 or 99 percent bacterial .
These bacteria are not passive riders , these are incredibly important , they keep us alive .
They cover us in an invisible body armor that keeps environmental insults out so that we stay healthy .
They digest our food , they make our vitamins , they actually educate your immune system to keep bad microbes out .
So they do all these amazing things that help us and are vital for keeping us alive , and they never get any press for that .
But they get a lot of press because they do a lot of terrible things as well .
So , theres all kinds of bacteria on the Earth that have no business being in you or on you at any time , and if they are , they make you incredibly sick .
And so , the question for my lab is whether you want to think about all the good things that bacteria do , or all the bad things that bacteria do .
The question we had is how could they do anything at all ?
I mean theyre incredibly small , you have to have a microscope to see one .
They live this sort of boring life where they grow and divide , and theyve always been considered to be these asocial reclusive organisms .
And so it seemed to us that they are just too small to have an impact on the environment if they simply act as individuals .
And so we wanted to think if there couldnt be a different way that bacteria live .
The clue to this came from another marine bacterium , and its a bacterium called Vibrio fischeri .
What youre looking at on this slide is just a person from my lab holding a flask of a liquid culture of a bacterium , a harmless beautiful bacterium that comes from the ocean , named Vibrio fischeri .
This bacterium has the special property that it makes light , so it makes bioluminescence , like fireflies make light .
Were not doing anything to the cells here .
We just took the picture by turning the lights off in the room , and this is what we see .
What was actually interesting to us was not that the bacteria made light , but when the bacteria made light .
What we noticed is when the bacteria were alone , so when they were in dilute suspension , they made no light .
But when they grew to a certain cell number all the bacteria turned on light simultaneously .
The question that we had is how can bacteria , these primitive organisms , tell the difference from times when theyre alone , and times when theyre in a community , and then all do something together .
What weve figured out is that the way that they do that is that they talk to each other , and they talk with a chemical language .
This is now supposed to be my bacterial cell .
When its alone it doesnt make any light .
But what it does do is to make and secrete small molecules that you can think of like hormones , and these are the red triangles , and when the bacteria is alone the molecules just float away and so no light .
But when the bacteria grow and double and theyre all participating in making these molecules , the molecule  -  -  the extracellular amount of that molecule increases in proportion to cell number .
And when the molecule hits a certain amount that tells the bacteria how many neighbors there are , they recognize that molecule and all of the bacteria turn on light in synchrony .
Thats how bioluminescence works  -  -  theyre talking with these chemical words .
The reason that Vibrio fischeri is doing that comes from the biology .
Again , another plug for the animals in the ocean , Vibrio fischeri lives in this squid .
What you are looking at is the Hawaiian Bobtail Squid , and its been turned on its back , and what I hope you can see are these two glowing lobes and these house the Vibrio fischeri cells , they live in there , at high cell number that molecule is there , and theyre making light .
The reason the squid is willing to put up with these shenanigans is because it wants that light .
The way that this symbiosis works is that this little squid lives just off the coast of Hawaii , just in sort of shallow knee - deep water .
The squid is nocturnal , so during the day it buries itself in the sand and sleeps , but then at night it has to come out to hunt .
On bright nights when there is lots of starlight or moonlight that light can penetrate the depth of the water the squid lives in , since its just in those couple feet of water .
What the squid has developed is a shutter that can open and close over this specialized light organ housing the bacteria .
Then it has detectors on its back so it can sense how much starlight or moonlight is hitting its back .
And it opens and closes the shutter so the amount of light coming out of the bottom  -  -  which is made by the bacterium  -  -  exactly matches how much light hits the squids back , so the squid doesnt make a shadow .
It actually uses the light from the bacteria to counter - illuminate itself in an anti - predation device so predators cant see its shadow , calculate its trajectory , and eat it .
This is like the stealth bomber of the ocean .
But then if you think about it , the squid has this terrible problem because its got this dying , thick culture of bacteria and it cant sustain that .
And so what happens is every morning when the sun comes up the squid goes back to sleep , it buries itself in the sand , and its got a pump thats attached to its circadian rhythm , and when the sun comes up it pumps out like 95 percent of the bacteria .
Now the bacteria are dilute , that little hormone molecule is gone , so theyre not making light  -  -  but of course the squid doesnt care . Its asleep in the sand .
And as the day goes by the bacteria double , they release the molecule , and then light comes on at night , exactly when the squid wants it .
First we figured out how this bacterium does this , but then we brought the tools of molecular biology to this to figure out really whats the mechanism .
And what we found  -  -  so this is now supposed to be , again , my bacterial cell  -  -  is that Vibrio fischeri has a protein  -  -  thats the red box  -  -  its an enzyme that makes that little hormone molecule , the red triangle .
And then as the cells grow , theyre all releasing that molecule into the environment , so theres lots of molecule there .
And the bacteria also have a receptor on their cell surface that fits like a lock and key with that molecule .
These are just like the receptors on the surfaces of your cells .
When the molecule increases to a certain amount  -  -  which says something about the number of cells  -  -  it locks down into that receptor and information comes into the cells that tells the cells to turn on this collective behavior of making light .
Why this is interesting is because in the past decade we have found that this is not just some anomaly of this ridiculous , glow - in - the - dark bacterium that lives in the ocean  -  -  all bacteria have systems like this .
So now what we understand is that all bacteria can talk to each other .
They make chemical words , they recognize those words , and they turn on group behaviors that are only successful when all of the cells participate in unison .
We have a fancy name for this : we call it quorum sensing .
They vote with these chemical votes , the vote gets counted , and then everybody responds to the vote .
Whats important for todays talk is that we know that there are hundreds of behaviors that bacteria carry out in these collective fashions .
But the one thats probably the most important to you is virulence .
Its not like a couple bacteria get in you and they start secreting some toxins  -  -  youre enormous , that would have no effect on you . Youre huge .
What they do , we now understand , is they get in you , they wait , they start growing , they count themselves with these little molecules , and they recognize when they have the right cell number that if all of the bacteria launch their virulence attack together , they are going to be successful at overcoming an enormous host .
Bacteria always control pathogenicity with quorum sensing .
Thats how it works .
We also then went to look at what are these molecules  -  -  these were the red triangles on my slides before .
This is the Vibrio fischeri molecule .
This is the word that it talks with .
So then we started to look at other bacteria , and these are just a smattering of the molecules that weve discovered .
What I hope you can see is that the molecules are related .
The left - hand part of the molecule is identical in every single species of bacteria .
But the right - hand part of the molecule is a little bit different in every single species .
What that does is to confer exquisite species specificities to these languages .
Each molecule fits into its partner receptor and no other .
So these are private , secret conversations .
These conversations are for intraspecies communication .
Each bacteria uses a particular molecule thats its language that allows it to count its own siblings .
Once we got that far we thought we were starting to understand that bacteria have these social behaviors .
But what we were really thinking about is that most of the time bacteria dont live by themselves , they live in incredible mixtures , with hundreds or thousands of other species of bacteria .
And thats depicted on this slide . This is your skin .
So this is just a picture  -  -  a micrograph of your skin .
Anywhere on your body , it looks pretty much like this , and what I hope you can see is that theres all kinds of bacteria there .
And so we started to think if this really is about communication in bacteria , and its about counting your neighbors , its not enough to be able to only talk within your species .
There has to be a way to take a census of the rest of the bacteria in the population .
So we went back to molecular biology and started studying different bacteria , and what weve found now is that in fact , bacteria are multilingual .
They all have a species - specific system  -  -  they have a molecule that says  me . 
But then , running in parallel to that is a second system that weve discovered , thats generic .
So , they have a second enzyme that makes a second signal and it has its own receptor , and this molecule is the trade language of bacteria .
Its used by all different bacteria and its the language of interspecies communication .
What happens is that bacteria are able to count how many of me and how many of you .
They take that information inside , and they decide what tasks to carry out depending on whos in the minority and whos in the majority of any given population .
Then again we turn to chemistry , and we figured out what this generic molecule is  -  -  that was the pink ovals on my last slide , this is it .
Its a very small , five - carbon molecule .
What the important thing is that we learned is that every bacterium has exactly the same enzyme and makes exactly the same molecule .
So theyre all using this molecule for interspecies communication .
This is the bacterial Esperanto .
Once we got that far , we started to learn that bacteria can talk to each other with this chemical language .
But what we started to think is that maybe there is something practical that we can do here as well .
Ive told you that bacteria do have all these social behaviors , they communicate with these molecules .
Of course , Ive also told you that one of the important things they do is to initiate pathogenicity using quorum sensing .
We thought , what if we made these bacteria so they cant talk or they cant hear ?
Couldnt these be new kinds of antibiotics ?
Of course , youve just heard and you already know that were running out of antibiotics .
Bacteria are incredibly multi - drug - resistant right now , and thats because all of the antibiotics that we use kill bacteria .
They either pop the bacterial membrane , they make the bacterium so it cant replicate its DNA .
We kill bacteria with traditional antibiotics and that selects for resistant mutants .
And so now of course we have this global problem in infectious diseases .
We thought , well what if we could sort of do behavior modifications , just make these bacteria so they cant talk , they cant count , and they dont know to launch virulence .
And so thats exactly what weve done , and weve sort of taken two strategies .
The first one is weve targeted the intraspecies communication system .
So we made molecules that look kind of like the real molecules  -  -  which you saw  -  -  but theyre a little bit different .
And so they lock into those receptors , and they jam recognition of the real thing .
By targeting the red system , what we are able to do is to make species - specific , or disease - specific , anti - quorum sensing molecules .
Weve also done the same thing with the pink system .
Weve taken that universal molecule and turned it around a little bit so that weve made antagonists of the interspecies communication system .
The hope is that these will be used as broad - spectrum antibiotics that work against all bacteria .
To finish Ill just show you the strategy .
In this one Im just using the interspecies molecule , but the logic is exactly the same .
What you know is that when that bacterium gets into the animal , in this case , a mouse , it doesnt initiate virulence right away .
It gets in , it starts growing , it starts secreting its quorum sensing molecules .
It recognizes when it has enough bacteria that now theyre going to launch their attack , and the animal dies .
What weve been able to do is to give these virulent infections , but we give them in conjunction with our anti - quorum sensing molecules  -  -  so these are molecules that look kind of like the real thing , but theyre a little bit different which Ive depicted on this slide .
What we now know is that if we treat the animal with a pathogenic bacterium  -  -  a multi - drug - resistant pathogenic bacterium  -  -  in the same time we give our anti - quorum sensing molecule , in fact , the animal lives .
We think that this is the next generation of antibiotics and its going to get us around , at least initially , this big problem of resistance .
What I hope you think , is that bacteria can talk to each other , they use chemicals as their words , they have an incredibly complicated chemical lexicon that were just now starting to learn about .
Of course what that allows bacteria to do is to be multicellular .
So in the spirit of TED theyre doing things together because it makes a difference .
What happens is that bacteria have these collective behaviors , and they can carry out tasks that they could never accomplish if they simply acted as individuals .
What I would hope that I could further argue to you is that this is the invention of multicellularity .
Bacteria have been on the Earth for billions of years ; humans , couple hundred thousand .
We think bacteria made the rules for how multicellular organization works .
We think , by studying bacteria , were going to be able to have insight about multicellularity in the human body .
We know that the principles and the rules , if we can figure them out in these sort of primitive organisms , the hope is that they will be applied to other human diseases and human behaviors as well .
I hope that what youve learned is that bacteria can distinguish self from other .
By using these two molecules they can say  me  and they can say  you . 
Again of course thats what we do , both in a molecular way , and also in an outward way , but I think about the molecular stuff .
This is exactly what happens in your body .
Its not like your heart cells and your kidney cells get all mixed up every day , and thats because theres all of this chemistry going on , these molecules that say who each of these groups of cells is , and what their tasks should be .
Again , we think that bacteria invented that , and youve just evolved a few more bells and whistles , but all of the ideas are in these simple systems that we can study .
The final thing is , again just to reiterate that theres this practical part , and so weve made these anti - quorum sensing molecules that are being developed as new kinds of therapeutics .
But then , to finish with a plug for all the good and miraculous bacteria that live on the Earth , weve also made pro - quorum sensing molecules .
So , weve targeted those systems to make the molecules work better .
Remember you have these 10 times or more bacterial cells in you or on you , keeping you healthy .
What were also trying to do is to beef up the conversation of the bacteria that live as mutualists with you , in the hopes of making you more healthy , making those conversations better , so bacteria can do things that we want them to do better than they would be on their own .
Finally , I wanted to show you this is my gang at Princeton , New Jersey .
Everything I told you about was discovered by someone in that picture .
I hope when you learn things , like about how the natural world works  -  -  I just want to say that whenever you read something in the newspaper or you get to hear some talk about something ridiculous in the natural world it was done by a child .
Science is done by that demographic .
All of those people are between 20 and 30 years old , and they are the engine that drives scientific discovery in this country .
Its a really lucky demographic to work with .
I keep getting older and older and theyre always the same age , and its just a crazy delightful job .
I want to thank you for inviting me here .
Its a big treat for me to get to come to this conference .
Thanks .
Richard Baraniuk : The birth of the open - source learning revolution
In 2006 , open - learning visionary Richard Baraniuk explains the vision behind Connexions , an open - source , online education system . It cuts out the textbook , allowing teachers to share and modify course materials freely , anywhere in the world .
Im Rich Baraniuk .
And what Id like to talk a little bit about today are some ideas that I think have just tremendous resonance with all the things that have been talked about the last two days .
In fact , so many different points of resonance that its going to be difficult to bring them all up , but Ill try to do my best .
Does anybody remember these ?
OK , so these are LP records and theyve been replaced , right ?
Theyve been swept away over the last two decades by these types of world - flattening digitization technologies , right ?
And I think it was best witnessed when Thomas was playing the music as we came in the room today .
Whats happened in the music world is theres a culture or an ecosystem thats been created that , if you take some words from Apple , the catchphrase that we create , rip , mix and burn .
What I mean by that is that anyone in the world is free and allowed to create new music and musical ideas .
Anyone in the world is allowed to rip or copy musical ideas , use them in innovative ways .
Anyone is allowed to mix them in different types of ways , draw connections between musical ideas and people can burn them or create final products and continue the circle .
And what thats done is its created , like I said , a vibrant community thats very inclusive with people continually working to connect musical ideas , innovate them and keep things constantly up to date .
Todays hit single is not last years hit single .
But , Im not here to talk about music today .
Im here to talk about books .
In particular , textbooks and the kind of educational materials that we use every day in school .
Has anyone here ever been to school ?
OK , does anybody realize theres a crisis in our schools , around the world ?
OK , Im not going to spend too much time on that , but what I want to talk about is some of the disconnects that appear when an author publishes a book that in fact , the publishing process  -  -  just because of the fact that its complicated , its heavy , books are expensive  -  -  creates a sort of a wall between authors of books and the ultimate users of books , be they teachers , students or just general readers .
And this is even more true if you happen to speak a language other than one of the worlds major languages , and especially English .
And Im going to call these people below the barrier Shut - outs , because theyre really shut out of the process of being able to share their knowledge with the world .
And so what I want to talk about today is trying to take these ideas that weve seen in the musical culture and try to bring these towards reinventing the way we think about writing books , using them and teaching from them .
So , thats what Id like to talk about and really , how do we get from where we are now to where we need to go ?
So , the first thing Id like you to do is a little thought experiment .
So , imagine taking all the worlds books .
OK , everybody imagine books and imagine just tearing out the pages .
So , liberating these pages and imagine digitizing them and then storing them in a vast , interconnected , global repository .
Think of it as a massive iTunes for book type content .
And then take that material and imagine making it all open , so that people can modify it , play with it , improve it .
Imagine making it free , so that anyone in the world can have access to all of this knowledge , and imagine using information technology so that you can update this content , improve it , play with it , on a timescale thats more on the order of seconds instead of years .
Instead of editions coming out every two years , of a book , imagine it coming out every 25 seconds .
So , imagine we could do that and imagine we could put people into this .
So that we could truly build an ecosystem with not just authors , but all the people who could be or want to be authors in all the different languages of the world , and I think if you could do this , it would be called , well , Im just going to refer to it as a knowledge ecosystem .
So , really , this is the dream and in a sense what you can think of it is we are trying to enable anyone in the world , I mean anyone in the world , to be their own educational DJ , creating educational materials , sharing them with the world , constantly innovating on them . So , this is the dream .
In fact , this dream is actually being realized .
Over the last six - and - a - half years , weve been working really hard at Rice University on a project called Connexions , and so what Id like to do for the rest of the talk is just tell you a little bit about what people are doing with Connexions , which you can kind of think of as the counterpoint to Nicholas Negropontes talk yesterday , where theyre working on the hardware of bringing education to the world .
Were working on the open - source tools and the content .
So , thats sort of to put it in perspective here .
So , create . So what are some of the people that are using these kind of tools ?
Well , the first thing is theres a community of engineering professors , from Cambridge to Kyoto , who are developing engineering content in electrical engineering to develop what you can think of as a massive , super textbook that covers the entire area of electrical engineering  -  -  and not only that , it can be customized for use in each of their own individual institutions .
If people like Kitty Jones  -  -  right , a shut - out  -  -  a private music teacher and mom from Champagne , Illinois , who wanted to share her fantastic music content with the world , on how to teach kids how to play music .
Her material is now used over 600,000 times per month .
Tremendous , tremendous use .
In fact , a lot of this use coming from Unites States , K - through - 12 schools because anyone whos involved in a school scale back , the first thing thats cut is the music curriculum and so this is just indicating the tremendous thirst for this kind of open , free content .
A lot of teachers are using this stuff . OK , what about ripping ?
What about copying , reusing , right ?
A team of volunteers at the University of Texas El Paso , graduate students translating this engineering super textbook ideas and within about a week , having this be some of our most popular material in widespread use all over Latin America and in particular in Mexico , because of the open extensible nature of this .
People , volunteers and even companies that are translating material into Asian languages like Chinese , Japanese and Thai , to spread the knowledge even further .
OK , what about people who are mixing ? What does  mixing  mean ?
 Mixing  means building customized courses , means building customized books .
Companies like National Instruments , who are embedding very powerful , interactive simulations into the materials , so that we can go way beyond our regular kind of textbook to an experience that all the teaching materials are things you can actually interact with and play around with and actually learn as you do .
Weve been working with Teachers Without Borders who are very interested in mixing our materials .
Theyre going to be using Connexions as their platform to develop and deliver teaching materials for teaching teachers how to teach in 84 countries that are around the world .
TWB is currently in Iraq training 20,000 teachers supported by USAID and to them , this idea of being able to remix and customize to the local context is extraordinarily important , because just providing free content to people has actually been likened by people in the developing world to a kind of cultural imperialism , that if you dont empower people with the ability to re - contextualize the material , translate it into their own language and take ownership of it , its not good .
OK , other organizations weve been working with , UC Merced , people know about UC Merced .
Its a new university in California , in the Central Valley , working very closely with community colleges .
Theyre actually developing a lot of their science and engineering curriculum to spread widely around the world in our system and theyre also trying to develop all of their software tools completely open - source .
Weve been working with AMD , which has a project called 50 by 15 , which is trying to bring Internet connectivity to 50 percent of the worlds population by 2015 .
Were going to be providing content to them in a whole range of different languages .
And weve also been working with a number of other organizations .
In particular , a bunch of the projects that are funded by Hewlett Foundation , who have taken a real leadership role in this area of open content .
OK , burn , I think this is sort of , quite interesting .
 Burn  is the idea of trying to create the physical instantiation of one of these courses .
And I think a lot of you received , I think all of you received one of these music books in your gift pack .
A little present for you .
Just to tell you quickly about it : this is an engineering textbook .
Its about 300 pages long , hardbound .
This costs , anybody guess ?
How much would it cost in a bookstore ?
Audience : 65 dollars .
Richard Baraniuk : This costs 22 dollars to the student .
Why does it cost 22 dollars ?
Because its published on demand and its developed from this repository of open materials .
If this book were to be published by a regular publisher , it would cost at least 122 dollars .
So what were seeing is moving this burning or publication process from the regular sort of single - authored book towards community - authored materials that are modular , that are customized to each individual class and published on demand very inexpensively , either pushed out through Amazon , or published directly through an on - demand press , like Coop .
And I think that this is an extraordinarily interesting area because there is tremendous area under this long tail in publishing .
Were not talking about the Harry Potter end , right at the left side .
Were talking about books on hyper geometric partial differential equations .
Right , books that might sell 100 copies a year , 1,000 copies a year .
There is tremendous sustaining revenue under this long tail to sustain open projects like ours , but also to sustain this new emergence of on - demand publishers , like Coop , who produced these two books .
And I think one of the things that you should take away from this talk , is that theres an impending cut - out - the - middle - man , disintermediation , thats going to be happening in the publishing industry , and its going to reach a crescendo over the next few years , and I think that its for our benefit , really , and for the worlds benefit .
OK , so what are the enablers ?
Whats really making all of this happen ?
Theres tons of technology , and the only piece of technology that I really want to talk about is XML .
How many people know about XML ?
Oh , great , so its the future of the web , right ?
Its semantic representation of comment , content , and what you can really think of XML in this case , is its the packaging that were putting around these pages .
Remember we took the book , tore the pages out ?
Well , what the XML is going to do is its going to turn those pages into Lego blocks .
XML are the nubs on the Lego that allow us to combine the content together in myriad different ways , and it provides us a framework to share content .
So , it lets you take this ecosystem in its primordial state , right , of all this content , all the pages youve torn out of books , and create highly sophisticated learning machines : books , courses , course packs .
It gives you the ability to personalize the learning experience to each individual student , so that every student can have a book or a course thats customized to their learning style , their context , their language and the things that excite them .
It lets you reuse the same materials in multiple different ways and surprising new ways .
It lets you interconnect ideas indicating how fields relate to each other , and Ill just give you my personal story .
We came up with this six - and - a - half years ago because I teach the stuff in the red box .
And my day job , as Chris said , Im an electrical engineering professor .
I teach signal processing and my challenge was to show that this math  -  -  wow , about half of you have already fallen asleep just looking at the equation  -  -  but this seemingly dry math is actually the center of this tremendously powerful web that links technology  -  -  that links really cool applications like music synthesizers to tremendous economic opportunities , but also governed by intellectual property .
And the thing that I realized is there was no way that I , as an engineer , could write this book that would get all of this across .
We needed a community to do it and we needed new tools to be able to interconnect these ideas , and I think that really , in a sense , what were trying to do is make Minskys dream come to a reality , where you can imagine all the books in a library actually starting to talk to each other .
And people who are teachers out here , whoever taught , you know this  -  -  its the interconnections between ideas that teaching is really all about .
OK , back to math . Imagine this is possible  -  -  that every single equation that you click on in one of your new e - texts is something that youre going to be able to explore and experiment with .
So imagine your kids algebra textbook in seventh grade .
You can click on every single equation and bring up a little tool to be able to experiment with it , tinker with it , understand it , because we really dont understand until we do .
The same type of mark - up , like mathML , for chemistry .
Imagine chemistry textbooks that actually understand the structure of how molecules are formed .
Imagine music XML that actually lets you delve into the semantic structure of music , play with it , understand it .
Its no wonder that everybodys getting into it , right ?
Even the three wise men .
OK , the second big enabler , and this is where I told a big lie .
The second big enabler is intellectual property , because in fact I got up here and I talked about how great the music culture is .
We can share and rip , mix and burn , but in fact thats all illegal .
And we would be accused of pirates for doing that , because this music has been propertized .
Its now owned , right , much of it by big industries .
So , really , the key thing here is we cant let this happen .
We cant let this Napster thing happen here .
So , what we have to do is get it right from the very beginning and what we have to do is find an intellectual property framework that makes sharing safe , and makes it easily understandable , and the inspiration here is taken from open - source software , things like Linux and the GPL .
And the ideas , the creative commons licenses .
How many people have heard of creative commons ?
If you have not , you must learn about it . Creativecommons . org .
At the bottom of every piece of material in Connexions and in lots of other projects , you can find their logo .
Clicking on that logo takes you to an absolute no - nonsense , human - readable document , a deed , that tells you exactly what you can do with this content .
In fact , youre free to share it , to do all of these things , to copy it , to change it , even to make commercial use of it as long as you attribute the author .
Because in academic publishing and much of educational publishing , its really this idea of sharing knowledge and making impact thats why people write , not necessarily making bucks .
Were not talking about Harry Potter , right ?
Were at the long tail end here .
Behind that is the legal code , so if you want to very carefully construct it , and creative commons is taking off  -  -  over 43 million things out there , licensed with a creative commons license .
Not just text , but music , images , video , and theres actually a tremendous uptake of the number of people that are actually licensing music to make it free for people who do this whole idea of re - sampling , rip , mixing , burning and sharing .
So Id like to conclude with just the last few points .
So , weve built this idea of a commons . People are using it .
We get over 500,000 unique visitors per month , just to our particular site .
MIT open courseware , which is another large open - content site , gets a similar number of hits , but how do we protect this ?
How do we protect it into the future ?
And the first thing that people are probably thinking is quality control , right ?
Because were saying that anybody can contribute things to this commons . Anybody can contribute anything .
So that could be a problem .
It didnt take long until people started contributing materials , for example , on lingerie , which is actually a pretty good module .
The only problem is its plagiarized from a major French feminist journal , and when you go to the supposed course website , it points to a lingerie - selling website .
This is a little bit of a problem , so we clearly need some kind of idea of quality control , and this is really where the idea of review and peer review comes in .
OK , you come to TED . Why do you come to TED ?
Because Chris and his team have ensured that things are very , very high quality , right , and so we need to be able to do the same thing .
And we need to be able to design structures and what were doing is designing social software to enable anyone to build their own peer review process , and we call these things  lenses . 
And basically what they allow is anyone out there to develop their own peer review process , so that they can focus on the content in the repository that they think is really important and you can think of TED as a potential lens .
So Id just like to end by saying , you can really view this as a call to action .
Connexions and open content is all about sharing knowledge .
All of you here are tremendously imbued with tremendous amounts of knowledge and what Id like to do is invite each and every one of you to contribute to this project and other projects of its type , because I think together we can truly change the landscape of education and educational publishing .
So , thanks very much .
Sam Martin : Claim your  manspace 
Author Sam Martin shares photos of a quirky world hobby thats trending with the XY set :  manspaces .  Grab a cold one and enjoy .
So , I am indeed going to talk about the spaces men create for themselves , but first I want to tell you why Im here .
Im here for two reasons . These two guys are my two sons Ford and Wren .
When Ford was about three years old , we shared a very small room together , in a very small space .
My office was on one half of the bedroom , and his bedroom was on the other half .
And you can imagine , if youre a writer , that things would get really crowded around deadlines .
So when Wren was on the way , I realized I needed to find a space of my own .
There was no more space in the house . So I went out to the backyard , and without any previous building experience , and about 3,000 dollars and some recycled materials , I built this space .
It had everything I needed . It was quiet .
There was enough space . And I had control , which was very important .
As I was building this space , I thought to myself ,  Surely Im not the only guy to have to have carved out a space for his own . 
So I did some research .
And I found that there was an historic precedence .
Hemingway had his writing space .
Elvis had two or three manspaces , which is pretty unique because he lived with both his wife and his mother in Graceland .
In the popular culture , Superman had the Fortress of Solitude , and there was , of course , the Batcave .
So I realized then that I wanted to go out on a journey and see what guys were creating for themselves now .
Here is one of the first spaces I found . It is in Austin , Texas , which is where Im from .
On the outside it looks like a very typical garage , a nice garage .
But on the inside , its anything but .
And this , to me , is a pretty classic manspace .
It has neon concert posters , a bar and , of course , the leg lamp , which is very important .
I soon realized that manspaces didnt have to be only inside .
This guy built a bowling alley in his backyard , out of landscaping timbers , astroturf .
And he found the scoreboard in the trash .
Heres another outdoor space , a little bit more sophisticated .
This a 1923 wooden tugboat , made completely out of Douglas fir .
The guy did it all himself .
And there is about 1,000 square feet of hanging - out space inside .
So , pretty early on in my investigations I realized what I was finding was not what I expected to find , which was , quite frankly , a lot of beer can pyramids and overstuffed couches and flat - screen TVs .
There were definitely hang - out spots .
But some were for working , some were for playing , some were for guys to collect their things .
Most of all , I was just surprised with what I was finding .
Take this place for example .
On the outside it looks like a typical northeastern garage .
This is in Long Island , New York .
The only thing that might tip you off is the round window .
On the inside its a recreation of a 16th century Japanese tea house .
The man imported all the materials from Japan , and he hired a Japanese carpenter to build it in the traditional style .
It has no nails or screws .
All the joints are hand - carved and hand - scribed .
Here is another pretty typical scene . This is a suburban Las Vegas neighborhood .
But you open one of the garage doors and there is a professional - size boxing ring inside .
And so there is a good reason for this .
It was built by this man who is Wayne McCullough .
He won the silver medal for Ireland in the 1992 Olympics , and he trains in this space . He trains other people .
And right off the garage he has his own trophy room where he can sort of bask in his accomplishments , which is another sort of important part about a manspace .
So , while this space represents someones profession , this one certainly represents a passion .
Its made to look like the inside of an English sailing ship .
Its a collection of nautical antiques from the 1700s and 1800s .
Museum quality .
So , as I came to the end of my journey , I found over 50 spaces .
And they were unexpected and they were surprising .
But they were also  -  -  I was really impressed by how personalized they were , and how much work went into them .
And I realized thats because the guys that I met were all very passionate about what they did .
And they really loved their professions .
And they were very passionate about their collections and their hobbies .
And so they created these spaces to reflect what they love to do , and who they were .
So if you dont have a space of your own , I highly recommend finding one , and getting into it .
Thank you very much .
Stefon Harris : There are no mistakes on the bandstand
What is a mistake ? By talking through examples with his improvisational Jazz quartet , Stefon Harris walks us to a profound truth : many actions are perceived as mistakes only because we dont react to them appropriately .
Okay , I have no idea what were going to play .
I wont be able to tell you what it is until it happens .
I didnt realize there was going to be a little music before .
So I think Im going to start with what I just heard .
Okay , so first of all , lets welcome Mr. Jamire Williams on the drums , Burniss Travis on the bass , and Mr. Christian Sands on the piano .
So the bandstand , as we call it , this is an incredible space .
It is really a sacred space .
And one of the things that is really sacred about it is that you have no opportunity to think about the future , or the past .
You really are alive right here in this moment .
There are so many decisions being made when you walk on the bandstand .
We had no idea what key we were going to play in .
In the middle , we sort of made our way into a song called  Titi Boom . 
But that could have happened  -  -  maybe , maybe not .
Everyones listening . Were responding .
You have no time for projected ideas .
So the idea of a mistake : From the perspective of a jazz musician , its easier to talk about someone elses mistake .
So the way I perceive a mistake when Im on the bandstand  -  -  first of all , we dont really see it as a mistake .
The only mistake lies in that Im not able to perceive what it is that someone else did .
Every  mistake  is an opportunity in jazz .
So its hard to even describe what a funny note would be .
So for example , if I played a color , like we were playing on a palette , that sounded like this ...
So if Christian played a note  -  -  like play an F .
See , these are all right inside of the color palette .
If you played an E .
See , these all lie right inside of this general emotional palette that we were painting .
If you played an F # though , to most peoples ears , they would perceive that as a mistake .
So Im going to show you , were going to play just for a second .
And were going to play on this palette .
And at some point , Christian will introduce this note .
And we wont react to it .
Hell introduce it for a second and then Ill stop , Ill talk for a second .
Well see what happens when we play with this palette .
So someone could conceptually perceive that as a mistake .
The only way that I would say it was a mistake is in that we didnt react to it .
It was an opportunity that was missed .
So its unpredictable . Well paint this palette again .
Hell play it . I dont know how well react to it , but something will change .
Well all accept his ideas , or not .
So you see , he played this note .
I ended up creating a melody out of it .
The texture changed in the drums this time .
It got a little bit more rhythmic , a little bit more intense in response to how I responded to it .
So there is no mistake .
The only mistake is if Im not aware , if each individual musician is not aware and accepting enough of his fellow band member to incorporate the idea and we dont allow for creativity .
So jazz , this bandstand is absolutely amazing .
Its a very purifying experience .
And I know that I speak for all of us when I tell you that we dont take it for granted .
We know that to be able to come on the bandstand and play music is a blessing .
So how does this all relate to behavioral finance ?
Well were jazz musicians , so stereotypically we dont have a great relationship to finance .
Anyway , I just wanted to sort of point out the way that we handle it .
And the other dynamic of it is that we dont micromanage in jazz .
You have some people who do .
But what that does is it actually limits the artistic possibilities .
If I come up and I dictate to the band that I want to play like this and I want the music to go this way , and I just jump right in ...
ready , just play some time .
One , two , one , two , three , four .
Its kind of chaotic because Im bullying my ideas .
Im telling them ,  You come with me over this way . 
If I really want the music to go there , the best way for me to do it is to listen .
This is a science of listening .
It has far more to do with what I can perceive than what it is that I can do .
So if I want the music to get to a certain level of intensity , the first step for me is to be patient , to listen to whats going on and pull from something thats going on around me .
When you do that , you engage and inspire the other musicians and they give you more , and gradually it builds .
Watch . One , two , a one , two , three , four .
Totally different experience when Im pulling ideas .
Its much more organic . Its much more nuanced .
Its not about bullying my vision or anything like that .
Its about being here in the moment , accepting one another and allowing creativity to flow .
Thank you .
Michael Archer : How well resurrect the gastric brooding frog , the Tasmanian tiger
The gastric brooding frog lays its eggs just like any other frog  -  -  then swallows them whole to incubate . That is , it did until it went extinct 30 years ago . Paleontologist Michael Archer makes a case to bring back the gastric brooding frog and the thylacine , commonly known as the Tasmanian tiger . 
I do want to test this question were all interested in : Does extinction have to be forever ?
Im focused on two projects I want to tell you about .
One is the Thylacine Project .
The other one is the Lazarus Project , and thats focused on the gastric brooding frog .
And it would be a fair question to ask , well , why have we focused on these two animals ?
Well , point number one , each of them represents a unique family of its own .
Weve lost a whole family .
Thats a big chunk of the global genome gone .
Id like it back .
The second reason is that we killed these things .
In the case of the thylacine , regrettably , we shot every one that we saw . We slaughtered them .
In the case of the gastric brooding frog , we may have  fungicided  it to death .
Theres a dreadful fungus thats sort of moving through the world thats called the chytrid fungus , and its nailing frogs all over the world .
We think thats probably what got this frog , and humans are spreading this fungus .
And this introduces a very important ethical point , and I think you will have heard this many times when this topic comes up .
What I think is important is that , if its clear that we exterminated these species , then I think we not only have a moral obligation to see what we can do about it , but I think weve got a moral imperative to try to do something , if we can .
Okay . Let me talk to you about the Lazarus Project .
Its a frog . And you think , frog .
Yeah , but this was not just any frog .
Unlike a normal frog , which lays its eggs in the water and goes away and wishes its froglets well , this frog swallowed its fertilized eggs , swallowed them into the stomach where it should be having food , didnt digest the eggs , and turned its stomach into a uterus .
In the stomach , the eggs went on to develop into tadpoles , and in the stomach , the tadpoles went on to develop into frogs , and they grew in the stomach until eventually the poor old frog was at risk of bursting apart .
It has a little cough and a hiccup , and out comes sprays of little frogs .
Now , when biologists saw this , they were agog .
They thought , this is incredible .
No animal , let alone a frog , has been known to do this , to change one organ in the body into another .
And you can imagine the medical world went nuts over this as well .
If we could understand how that frog is managing the way its tummy works , is there information here that we need to understand or could usefully use to help ourselves ?
Now , Im not suggesting we want to raise our babies in our stomach , but I am suggesting its possible we might want to manage gastric secretion in the gut .
And just as everybody got excited about it , bang !
It was extinct .
I called up my friend , Professor Mike Tyler in the University of Adelaide .
He was the last person who had this frog , a colony of these things , in his lab .
And I said ,  Mike , by any chance  -  -   this was 30 or 40 years ago —  by any chance had you kept any frozen tissue of this frog ? 
And he thought about it , and he went to his deep freezer , minus 20 degrees centigrade , and he poured through everything in the freezer , and there in the bottom was a jar and it contained tissues of these frogs .
This was very exciting , but there was no reason why we should expect that this would work , because this tissue had not had any antifreeze put in it , cryoprotectants , to look after it when it was frozen .
And normally , when water freezes , as you know , it expands , and the same thing happens in a cell .
If you freeze tissues , the water expands , damages or bursts the cell walls .
Well , we looked at the tissue under the microscope .
It actually didnt look bad . The cell walls looked intact .
So we thought , lets give it a go .
What we did is something called somatic cell nuclear transplantation .
We took the eggs of a related species , a living frog , and we inactivated the nucleus of the egg .
We used ultraviolet radiation to do that .
And then we took the dead nucleus from the dead tissue of the extinct frog and we inserted those nuclei into that egg .
Now by rights , this is kind of like a cloning project , like what produced Dolly , but its actually very different , because Dolly was live sheep into live sheep cells .
That was a miracle , but it was workable .
What were trying to do is take a dead nucleus from an extinct species and put it into a completely different species and expect that to work .
Well , we had no real reason to expect it would , and we tried hundreds and hundreds of these .
And just last February , the last time we did these trials , I saw a miracle starting to happen .
What we found was , most of these eggs didnt work , but then suddenly one of them began to divide .
That was so exciting . And then the egg divided again .
And then again . And pretty soon , we had early stage embryos with hundreds of cells forming those .
We even DNA tested some of these cells , and the DNA of the extinct frog is in those cells .
So were very excited . This is not a tadpole .
Its not a frog . But its a long way along the journey to producing , or bringing back , an extinct species .
And this is news . We havent announced this publicly before .
Were excited . Weve got to get past this point .
We now want this ball of cells to start to gastrulate , to turn in so that it will produce the other tissues .
Itll go on and produce a tadpole and then a frog .
Watch this space . I think were going to have this frog hopping glad to be back in the world again .
Thank you .
We havent done it yet , but keep those applause ready .
The second project I want to talk to you about is the Thylacine Project .
The thylacine looks a bit , to most people , like a dog , or maybe like a tiger , because it has stripes .
But its not related to any of those .
Its a marsupial . It raised its young in a pouch , like a koala or a kangaroo would do , and it has a long history , a long , fascinating history , that goes back 25 million years .
But its also a tragic history .
The first one that we see occurs in the ancient rainforests of Australia about 25 million years ago , and the National Geographic Society is helping us to explore these fossil deposits . This is Riversleigh .
In those fossil rocks are some amazing animals .
We found marsupial lions .
We found carnivorous kangaroos .
Its not what you usually think about as a kangaroo , but these are meat - eating kangaroos .
We found the biggest bird in the world , bigger than that thing that was in Madagascar , and it too was a flesh - eater . It was a giant , weird duck .
And crocodiles were not behaving at that time either .
You think of crocodiles as doing their ugly thing , sitting in a pool of water .
These crocodiles were actually out on the land and they were even climbing trees and jumping on prey on the ground .
We had , in Australia , drop crocs . They really do exist .
But what they were dropping on was not only other weird animals but also thylacines .
There were five different kinds of thylacines in those ancient forests , and they ranged from great big ones to middle - sized ones to one that was about the size of a chihuahua .
Paris Hilton would have been able to carry one of these things around in a little handbag , until a drop croc landed on her .
At any rate , it was a fascinating place , but unfortunately , Australia didnt stay this way .
Climate change has affected the world for a long period of time , and gradually , the forests disappeared , the country began to dry out , and the number of kinds of thylacines began to decline , until by five million years ago , only one left .
By 10,000 years ago , they had disappeared from New Guinea , and unfortunately by 4,000 years ago , somebodies , we dont know who this was , introduced dingoes  -  -  this is a very archaic kind of a dog — into Australia .
And as you can see , dingoes are very similar in their body form to thylacines .
That similarity meant they probably competed .
They were eating the same kinds of foods .
Its even possible that aborigines were keeping some of these dingoes as pets , and therefore they may have had an advantage in the battle for survival .
All we know is , soon after the dingoes were brought in , thylacines were extinct in the Australian mainland , and after that they only survived in Tasmania .
Then , unfortunately , the next sad part of the thylacine story is that Europeans arrived in 1788 , and they brought with them the things they valued , and that included sheep .
They took one look at the thylacine in Tasmania , and they thought , hang on , this is not going to work .
That guy is going to eat all our sheep .
That was not what happened , actually .
Wild dogs did eat a few of the sheep , but the thylacine got a bad rap .
But immediately , the government said , thats it , lets get rid of them , and they paid people to slaughter every one that they saw .
By the early 1930s , 3,000 to 4,000 thylacines had been murdered . It was a disaster , and they were about to hit the wall .
Have a look at this bit of film footage .
It makes me very sad , because , while , its a fascinating animal , and its amazing to think that we had the technology to film it before it actually plunged off that cliff of extinction , we didnt , unfortunately , at this same time , have a molecule of concern about the welfare for this species .
These are photos of the last surviving thylacine , Benjamin , who was in the Beaumaris Zoo in Hobart .
To add insult to injury , having swept this species nearly off the table , this animal , when it died of neglect , the keepers didnt let it into the hutch on a cold night in Hobart . It died of exposure , and in the morning , when they found the body of Benjamin , they still cared so little for this animal that they threw the body in the dump .
Does it have to stay this way ?
In 1990 , I was in the Australian Museum .
I was fascinated by thylacines . Ive always been obsessed with these animals .
And I was studying skulls , trying to figure out their relationships to other sorts of animals , and I saw this jar , and here , in the jar , was a little girl thylacine pup , perhaps six months old .
The guy who had found it and killed the mother had pickled the pup and they pickled it in alcohol .
Im a paleontologist , but I still knew alcohol was a DNA preservative .
But this was 1990 , and I asked my geneticist friends , couldnt we think about going into this pup and extracting DNA , if its there , and then somewhere down the line in the future , well use this DNA to bring the thylacine back ?
The geneticists laughed . But this was six years before Dolly .
Cloning was science fiction . It had not happened .
But then suddenly cloning did happen .
And I thought , when I became director of the Australian Museum , Im going to give this a go .
I put a team together .
We went into that pup to see what was in there , and we did find thylacine DNA . It was a eureka moment .
We were very excited .
Unfortunately , we also found a lot of human DNA .
Every old curator whod been in that museum had seen this wonderful specimen , put their hand in the jar , pulled it out and thought ,  Wow , look at that ,  plop , dropped it back in the jar , contaminating this specimen .
And that was a worry . If the goal here was to get the DNA out and use the DNA down the track to try to bring a thylacine back , what we didnt want happening when the information was shoved into the machine and the wheel turned around and the lights flashed , was to have a wizened old horrible curator pop out the other end of the machine .
It wouldve kept the curator very happy , but it wasnt going to keep us happy .
So we went back to these specimens and we started digging around , and particularly we looked into the teeth of skulls , hard parts where humans had not been able to get their fingers , and we found much better quality DNA .
We found nuclear mitochondrial genes . Its there .
So we got it .
Okay . What could we do with this stuff ?
Well , George Church in his book ,  Regenesis ,  has mentioned many of the techniques that are rapidly advancing to work with fragmented DNA .
We would hope that well be able to get that DNA back into a viable form , and then , much like weve done with the Lazarus Project , get that stuff into an egg of a host species .
It has to be a different species .
What could it be ? Why couldnt it be a Tasmanian devil ?
Theyre related distantly to thylacines .
And then the Tasmanian devil is going to pop a thylacine out the south end .
Critics of this project say , hang on .
Thylacine , Tasmanian devil ? Thats going to hurt .
No , its not . These are marsupials .
They give birth to babies that are the size of a jelly bean .
That Tasmanian devils not even going to know it gave birth .
It is , shortly , going to think its got the ugliest Tasmanian devil baby in the world , so maybe itll need some help to keep it going .
Andrew Pask and his colleagues have demonstrated this might not be a waste of time .
And its sort of in the future , we havent got there yet , but its the kind of thing we want to think about .
They took some of this same pickled thylacine DNA and they spliced it into a mouse genome , but they put a tag on it so that anything that this thylacine DNA produced would appear blue - green in the mouse baby .
In other words , if thylacine tissues were being produced by the thylacine DNA , it would be able to be recognized .
When the baby popped up , it was filled with blue - green tissues .
And that tells us if we can get that genome back together , get it into a live cell , its going to produce thylacine stuff .
Is this a risk ?
Youve taken the bits of one animal and youve mixed them into the cell of a different kind of an animal .
Are we going to get a Frankenstein ?
You know , some kind of weird hybrid chimera ?
And the answer is no .
If the only nuclear DNA that goes into this hybrid cell is thylacine DNA , thats the only thing that can pop out the other end of the devil .
Okay , if we can do this , could we put it back ?
This is a key question for everybody .
Does it have to stay in a laboratory , or could we put it back where it belongs ?
Could we put it back in the throne of the king of beasts in Tasmania where it belongs , restore that ecosystem ?
Or has Tasmania changed so much that thats no longer possible ?
Ive been to Tasmania . Ive been to many of the areas where the thylacines were common .
Ive even spoken to people , like Peter Carter here , who when I spoke to him was 90 years old , but in 1926 , this man and his father and his brother caught thylacines . They trapped them .
And it just , when I spoke to this man , I was looking in his eyes and thinking , behind those eyes is a brain that has memories of what thylacines feel like , what they smelled like , what they sounded like .
He led them around on a rope .
He has personal experiences that I would give my left leg to have in my head .
Wed all love to have this sort of thing happen .
Anyway , I asked Peter , by any chance , could he take us back to where he caught those thylacines .
My interest was in whether the environment had changed .
He thought hard . I mean , it was nearly 80 years before this that hed been at this hut .
At any rate , he led us down this bush track , and there , right where he remembered , was the hut , and tears came into his eyes .
He looked at the hut . We went inside .
There were the wooden boards on the sides of the hut where he and his father and his brother had slept at night .
And he told me , as it all was flooding back in memories .
He said ,  I remember the thylacines going around the hut wondering what was inside ,  and he said they made sounds like  Yip ! Yip ! Yip ! 
All of these are parts of his life and what he remembers .
And the key question for me was to ask Peter , has it changed ? And he said no .
The southern beech forests surrounded his hut just like it was when he was there in 1926 .
The grasslands were sweeping away .
Thats classic thylacine habitat .
And the animals in those areas were the same that were there when the thylacine was around .
So could we put it back ? Yes .
Is that all we would do ? And this is an interesting question .
Sometimes you might be able to put it back , but is that the safest way to make sure it never goes extinct again , and I dont think so .
I think gradually , as we see species all around the world , its kind of a mantra that wildlife is increasingly not safe in the wild .
Wed love to think it is , but we know it isnt .
We need other parallel strategies coming online .
And this one interests me .
Some of the thylacines that were being turned into zoos , sanctuaries , even at the museums , had collar marks on the neck .
They were being kept as pets , and we know a lot of bush tales and memories of people who had them as pets , and they say they were wonderful , friendly .
This particular one came in out of the forest to lick this boy and curled up around the fireplace to go to sleep . A wild animal .
And Id like to ask the question , all of  -  -  we need to think about this .
If it had not been illegal to keep these thylacines as pets then , would the thylacine be extinct now ?
And Im positive it wouldnt .
We need to think about this in todays world .
Could it be that getting animals close to us so that we value them , maybe they wont go extinct ?
And this is such a critical issue for us , because if we dont do that , were going to watch more of these animals plunge off the precipice .
As far as Im concerned , this is why were trying to do these kinds of de - extinction projects .
We are trying to restore that balance of nature that we have upset .
Thank you .
Mohamed Hijri : A simple solution to the coming phosphorus crisis
Biologist Mohamed Hijri brings to light a farming crisis no one is talking about : We are running out of phosphorus , an essential element thats a key component of DNA and the basis of cellular communication . All roads of this crisis lead back to how we farm  -  -  with chemical fertilizers chock - full of the element , which plants are not efficient at absorbing . One solution ? Perhaps … a microscopic mushroom .
Im going to start by asking you a question : Is anyone familiar with the blue algae problem ?
Okay , so most of you are .
I think we can all agree its a serious issue .
Nobody wants to drink blue algae - contaminated water , or swim in a blue algae - infested lake .
Right ?
I hope you wont be disappointed , but today , I wont be talking about blue algae .
Instead , Ill be talking about the main cause at the root of this issue , which I will be referring to as the phosphorus crisis .
Why have I chosen to talk to you about the phosphorus crisis today ?
For the simple reason that nobody else is talking about it .
And by the end of my presentation , I hope that the general public will be more aware of this crisis and this issue .
Now , the problem is that if I ask , why do we find ourselves in this situation with blue algae ?
The answer is that it comes from how we farm .
We use fertilizers in our farming , chemical fertilizers .
Why do we use chemical fertilizers in agriculture ?
Basically , to help plants grow and to produce a better yield .
The issue is that this is set to engender an environmental problem that is without precedent .
Before going further , let me give you a crash course in plant biology .
So , what does a plant need in order to grow ?
A plant , quite simply , needs light , it needs CO2 , but even more importantly , it needs nutrients , which it draws from the soil .
Several of these nutrients are essential chemical elements : phosphorus , nitrogen and calcium .
So , the plants roots will extract these resources .
Today Ill be focusing on a major problem that is linked to phosphorus .
Why phosphorus in particular ?
Because it is the most problematic chemical element .
By the end of my presentation , you will have seen what these problems are , and where we are today .
Phosphorus is a chemical element that is essential to life . This is a very important point .
Id like everyone to understand precisely what the phosphorus issue is .
Phosphorus is a key component in several molecules , in many of our molecules of life .
Experts in the field will know that cellular communication is phosphorus - based  -  -  phosphorylation , dephosphorylation .
Cell membranes are phosphorus - based : These are called phospholipids .
The energy in all living things , ATP , is phosphorus - based .
And more importantly still , phosphorus is a key component of DNA , something everyone is familiar with , and which is shown in this image .
DNA is our genetic heritage .
It is extremely important , and once again , phosphorus is a key player .
Now , where do we find this phosphorus ?
As humans , where do we find it ?
As I explained earlier , plants extract phosphorus from the soil , through water .
So , we humans get it from the things we eat : plants , vegetables , fruits , and also from eggs , meat and milk .
Its true that some humans eat better than others .
Some are happier than others .
And now , looking at this picture , which speaks for itself , we see modern agriculture , which I also refer to as intensive agriculture .
Intensive agriculture is based on the use of chemical fertilizers .
Without them , we would not manage to produce enough to feed the worlds population .
Speaking of humans , there are currently 7 billion of us on Earth .
In less than 40 years , there will be 9 billion of us .
And the question is a simple one : Do we have enough phosphorus to feed our future generations ?
So , in order to understand these issues , where do we find our phosphorus ?
Let me explain .
But first , lets just suppose that we are using 100 percent of a given dose of phosphorus .
Only 15 percent of this 100 percent goes to the plant . Eighty - five percent is lost .
It goes into the soil , ending its journey in the lakes , resulting in lakes with extra phosphorus , which leads to the blue algae problem .
So , youll see theres a problem here , something that is illogical .
A hundred percent of the phosphorus is used , but only 15 percent goes to the plant .
Youre going to tell me its wasteful .
Yes , it is . What is worse is that it is very expensive .
Nobody wants to throw their money out the window , but unfortunately thats what is happening here .
Eighty percent of each dose of phosphorus is lost .
Modern agriculture depends on phosphorus .
And because in order to get 15 percent of it to the plant , all the rest is lost , we have to add more and more .
Now , where will we get this phosphorus from ?
Basically , we get it out of mines .
This is the cover of an extraordinary article published in Nature in 2009 , which really launched the discussion about the phosphorus crisis .
Phosphorus , a nutrient essential to life , which is becoming increasingly scarce , yet nobody is talking about it .
And everyone agrees : Politicians and scientists are in agreement that we are headed for a phosphorus crisis .
What you are seeing here is an open - pit mine in the U.S . , and to give you an idea of the dimensions of this mine , if you look in the top right - hand corner , the little crane you can see , that is a giant crane .
So that really puts it into perspective .
So , we get phosphorus from mines .
And if I make a comparison with oil , theres an oil crisis , we talk about it , we talk about global warming , yet we never mention the phosphorus crisis .
To come back to the oil problem , oil is something we can replace .
We can use biofuels , or solar power , or hydropower , but phosphorus is an essential element , indispensable to life , and we cant replace it .
What is the current state of the worlds phosphorus reserves ?
This graph gives you a rough idea of where we are today .
The black line represents predictions for phosphorus reserves .
In 2030 , well reach the peak .
By the end of this century , it will all be gone .
The dotted line shows where we are today .
As you can see , they meet in 2030 , Ill be retired by then .
But we are indeed heading for a major crisis , and Id like people to become aware of this problem .
Do we have a solution ?
What are we to do ? We are faced with a paradox .
Less and less phosphorus will be available .
By 2050 there will be 9 billion of us , and according to the U.N . Food and Agriculture Organization , we will need to produce twice as much food in 2050 than we do today .
So , we will have less phosphorus , but well need to produce more food .
What should we do ?
It truly is a paradoxical situation .
Do we have a solution , or an alternative which will allow us to optimize phosphorus use ?
Remember that 80 percent is destined to be lost .
The solution Im offering today is one that has existed for a very long time , even before plants existed on Earth , and its a microscopic mushroom that is very mysterious , very simple , and yet also extremely complex .
Ive been fascinated by this little mushroom for over 16 years now .
It has led me to further my research and to use it as a model for my laboratory research .
This mushroom exists in symbiosis with the roots .
By symbiosis , I mean a bidirectional and mutually beneficial association which is also called mycorrhiza .
This slide illustrates the elements of a mycorrhiza .
Youre looking at the root of wheat , one of the worlds most important plants .
Normally , a root will find phosphorus all by itself .
It will go in search of phosphorus , but only within the one millimeter which surrounds it .
Beyond one millimeter , the root is ineffective .
It can not go further in its search for phosphorus .
Now , imagine this tiny , microscopic mushroom .
It grows much faster , and is much better designed to seek out phosphorus .
It can go beyond the roots one - millimeter scope to seek out phosphorus .
I havent invented anything at all ; its a biotechnology that has existed for 450 million years .
And over time , this mushroom has evolved and adapted to seek out even the tiniest trace of phosphorus , and to put it to use , to make it available to the plant .
What youre seeing here , in the real world , is a carrot root , and the mushroom with its very fine filaments .
Looking closer , we can see that this mushroom is very gentle in its penetration .
It will proliferate between the roots cells , eventually penetrating a cell and starting to form a typical arbuscular structure , which will considerably increase the exchange interface between the plant and the mushroom .
And it is through this structure that mutual exchanges will occur .
Its a win - win trade : I give you phosphorus , and you feed me .
True symbiosis .
Now lets add a mycorrhiza plant into the diagram I used earlier .
And instead of using a 100 percent dose , Im going to reduce it to 25 percent .
Youll see that of this 25 percent , most will benefit the plant , more than 90 percent .
A very small amount of phosphorus will remain in the soil .
Thats completely natural .
Whats more is that in certain cases , we dont even need to add phosphorus .
If you recall the graphs I showed you earlier , 85 percent of phosphorus is lost in the soil , and the plants are unable to access it .
Even though it is present in the soil , it is in insoluble form .
The plant is only able to seek out soluble forms .
The mushroom is capable of dissolving this insoluble form and making it available for the plant to use .
To further support my argument , here is a picture that speaks for itself .
These are trials in a field of sorghum .
On the left side , you see the yield produced using conventional agriculture , with a 100 percent phosphorus dose .
On the other side , the dose was reduced to 50 percent , and just look at the yield .
With only a half - dose , we achieved a better yield .
This is to show you that this method works .
And in some cases , in Cuba , Mexico and India , the dose can be reduced to 25 percent , and in several other cases , theres no need to add any phosphorus at all , because the mushrooms are so well adapted to finding phosphorus and drawing it from the soil .
This is an example of soy production in Canada .
Mycorrhiza was used in one field but not in the other .
And here , where blue indicates a better yield , and yellow a weaker yield .
The black rectangle is the plot from which the mycorrhiza was added .
In other words , as I already said , I have invented nothing .
Mycorrhiza has existed for 450 million years , and it has even helped modern - day plant species to diversify .
So , this it isnt something that is still undergoing lab tests .
Mycorrhiza exists , it works , its produced at an industrial scale and commercialized worldwide .
The problem is that people are not aware of it .
People like food producers and farmers are still not aware of this problem .
We have a technology that works , and one that , if used correctly , will alleviate some of the pressure we are putting on the worlds phosphorus reserves .
In conclusion , I am a scientist and a dreamer .
Im passionate about this topic .
So if you were to ask me what my retirement dream is , which will be at the moment we reach that phosphorus peak , it would be that we use one label ,  Made with mycorrhiza ,  and that my children and grandchildren buy products bearing that label too .
Thank you for your attention .
William Ury : The walk from  no  to  yes 
William Ury , author of  Getting to Yes ,  offers an elegant , simple way to create agreement in even the most difficult situations  -  -  from family conflict to , perhaps , the Middle East . 
Well , the subject of difficult negotiation reminds me of one of my favorite stories from the Middle East , of a man who left to his three sons 17 camels .
To the first son , he left half the camels .
To the second son , he left a third of the camels , and to the youngest son , he left a ninth of the camels .
Well three sons got into a negotiation .
Seventeen doesnt divide by two .
It doesnt divide by three .
It doesnt divide by nine .
Brotherly tempers started to get strained .
Finally , in desperation , they went and they consulted a wise old woman .
The wise old woman thought about their problem for a long time , and finally she came back and said ,  Well , I dont know if I can help you , but at least , if you want , you can have my camel . 
So then they had 18 camels .
The first son took his half  -  -  half of 18 is nine .
The second son took his third  -  -  a third of 18 is six .
The youngest son took his ninth  -  -  a ninth of 18 is two .
You get 17 .
They had one camel left over .
They gave it back to the wise old woman .
Now if you think about that story for a moment , I think it resembles a lot of the difficult negotiations we get involved in .
They start off like 17 camels  -  -  no way to resolve it .
Somehow , what we need to do is step back from those situations , like that wise old woman , look at the situation through fresh eyes and come up with an 18th camel .
Now finding that 18th camel in the worlds conflicts has been my life passion .
I basically see humanity a bit like those three brothers .
Were all one family .
We know that scientifically , thanks to the communications revolution , all the tribes on the planet , all 15,000 tribes , are in touch with each other .
And its a big family reunion , and yet , like many family reunions , its not all peace and light .
Theres a lot of conflict , and the question is , how do we deal with our differences ?
How do we deal with our deepest differences , given the human propensity for conflict and the human genius at devising weapons of enormous destruction ?
Thats the question .
As Ive spent the last better part of three decades , almost four , traveling the world , trying to work , getting involved in conflicts ranging from Yugoslavia to the Middle East to Chechnya to Venezuela , some of the most difficult conflicts on the face of the planet , Ive been asking myself that question .
And I think Ive found , in some ways , what is the secret to peace .
Its actually surprisingly simple .
Its not easy , but its simple .
Its not even new .
It may be one of our most ancient human heritages .
The secret to peace is us .
Its us who act as the surrounding community around any conflict , who can play a constructive role .
Let me give you just a story , an example .
About 20 years ago , I was in South Africa working with the parties in that conflict , and I had an extra month , so I spent some time living with several groups of San Bushmen .
I was curious about them and about the way in which they resolve conflict .
Because , after all , within living memory , they were hunters and gatherers , living pretty much like our ancestors lived for maybe 99 percent of the human story .
And all the men have these poison arrows that they use for hunting  -  -  absolutely fatal .
So how do they deal with their differences ?
Well what I learned is whenever tempers rise in those communities , someone goes and hides the poison arrows out in the bush , and then everyone sits around in a circle like this , and they sit , and they talk , and they talk .
It may take two days , three days , four days , but they dont rest until they find a resolution , or better yet , a reconciliation .
And if tempers are still too high , then they send someone off to visit some relatives as a cooling - off period .
Well that system is , I think , probably the system that kept us alive to this point , given our human tendencies .
That system , I call the  third side . 
Because if you think about it , normally when we think of conflict , when we describe it , theres always two sides  -  -  its Arabs versus Israelis , labor versus management , husband versus wife , Republicans versus Democrats .
But what we dont often see is that theres always a third side , and the third side of the conflict is us , its the surrounding community , its the friends , the allies , the family members , the neighbors .
And we can play an incredibly constructive role .
Perhaps the most fundamental way in which the third side can help is to remind the parties of whats really at stake .
For the sake of the kids , for the sake of the family , for the sake of the community , for the sake of the future , lets stop fighting for a moment and start talking .
Because , the thing is , when were involved in conflict , its very easy to lose perspective .
Its very easy to react .
Human beings  -  -  were reaction machines .
And as the saying goes , when angry , you will make the best speech you will ever regret .
And so the third side reminds us of that .
The third side helps us go to the balcony , which is a metaphor for a place of perspective , where we can keep our eyes on the prize .
Let me tell you a little story from my own negotiating experience .
Some years ago , I was involved as a facilitator in some very tough talks between the leaders of Russia and the leaders of Chechnya .
There was a war going on , as you know .
And we met in the Hague , in the Peace Palace , in the same room where the Yugoslav war crimes tribunal was taking place .
And the talks got off to a rather rocky start when the vice president of Chechnya began by pointing at the Russians and said ,  You should stay right here in your seats , because youre going to be on trial for war crimes . 
And then he went on , and then he turned to me and said ,  Youre an American .
Look at what you Americans are doing in Puerto Rico . 
And my mind started racing ,  Puerto Rico ? What do I know about Puerto Rico ? 
I started reacting , but then I tried to remember to go to the balcony .
And then when he paused , and everyone looked at me for a response , from a balcony perspective , I was able to thank him for his remarks and say ,  I appreciate your criticism of my country , and I take it as a sign that were among friends and can speak candidly to one another .
And what were here to do is not to talk about Puerto Rico or the past .
What were here to do is to see if we can figure out a way to stop the suffering and the bloodshed in Chechnya . 
The conversation got back on track .
Thats the role of the third side , is to help the parties to go to the balcony .
Now let me take you for a moment to whats widely regarded as the worlds most difficult conflict , or the most impossible conflict , is the Middle East .
Question is : wheres the third side there ?
How could we possibly go to the balcony ?
Now I dont pretend to have an answer to the Middle East conflict , but I think Ive got a first step , literally , a first step , something that any one of us could do as third - siders .
Let me just ask you one question first .
How many of you in the last years have ever found yourself worrying about the Middle East and wondering what anyone could do ?
Just out of curiosity , how many of you ?
Okay , so the great majority of us .
And here , its so far away .
Why do we pay so much attention to this conflict ?
Is it the number of deaths ?
There are a hundred times more people who die in a conflict in Africa than in the Middle East .
No , its because of the story , because we feel personally involved in that story .
Whether were Christians , Muslims or Jews , religious or non - religious , we feel we have a personal stake in it .
Stories matter . As an anthropologist , I know that .
Stories are what we use to transmit knowledge .
They give meaning to our lives .
Thats what we tell here at TED , we tell stories .
Stories are the key .
And so my question is , yes , lets try and resolve the politics there in the Middle East , but lets also take a look at the story .
Lets try to get at the root of what its all about .
Lets see if we can apply the third side to it .
What would that mean ? What is the story there ?
Now as anthropologists , we know that every culture has an origin story .
Whats the origin story of the Middle East ?
In a phrase , its : 4,000 years ago , a man and his family walked across the Middle East , and the world has never been the same since .
That man , of course , was Abraham .
And what he stood for was unity , the unity of the family .
Hes the father of us all .
But its not just what he stood for , its what his message was .
His basic message was unity too , the interconnectedness of it all , the unity of it all , and his basic value was respect , was kindness toward strangers .
Thats what hes known for , his hospitality .
So in that sense , hes the symbolic third side of the Middle East .
Hes the one who reminds us that were all part of a greater whole .
Now how would you  -  -  now think about that for a moment .
Today we face the scourge of terrorism .
What is terrorism ?
Terrorism is basically taking an innocent stranger and treating them as an enemy whom you kill in order to create fear .
Whats the opposite of terrorism ?
Its taking an innocent stranger and treating them as a friend whom you welcome into your home in order to sow and create understanding , or respect , or love .
So what if then you took the story of Abraham , which is a third side story , what if that could be  -  -  because Abraham stands for hospitality  -  -  what if that could be an antidote to terrorism ?
What if that could be a vaccine against religious intolerance ?
How would you bring that story to life ?
Now its not enough just to tell a story  -  -  thats powerful  -  -  but people need to experience the story .
They need to be able to live the story . How would you do that ?
And that was my thinking of how would you do that .
And thats what comes to the first step here .
Because the simple way to do that You go for a walk in the footsteps of Abraham .
You retrace the footsteps of Abraham .
Because walking has a real power .
You know , as an anthropologist , walking is what made us human .
Walking , its funny , when you walk , you walk side - by - side in the same common direction .
Now if I were to come to you face - to - face and come this close to you , you would feel threatened .
But if I walk shoulder - to - shoulder , even touching shoulders , its no problem .
Who fights while they walk ?
Thats why in negotiations , often , when things get tough , people go for walks in the woods .
So the idea came to me of what about inspiring a path , a route  -  -  think the silk route , think the Appalachian trail  -  -  that followed in the footsteps of Abraham .
People said ,  Thats crazy . You cant .
You cant retrace the footsteps of Abraham . Its too insecure .
Youve got to cross all these borders .
It goes across 10 different countries in the Middle East , because it unites them all . 
And so we studied the idea at Harvard .
We did our due diligence .
And then a few years ago , a group of us , about 25 of us from about 10 different countries , decided to see if we could retrace the footsteps of Abraham , going from his initial birthplace in the city of Urfa in Southern Turkey , Northern Mesopotamia .
And we then took a bus and took some walks and went to Harran , where , in the Bible , he sets off on his journey .
Then we crossed the border into Syria , went to Aleppo , which , turns out , is named after Abraham .
We went to Damascus , which has a long history associated with Abraham .
We then came to Northern Jordan , to Jerusalem , which is all about Abraham , to Bethlehem , and finally to the place where hes buried in Hebron .
So effectively , we went from womb to tomb .
We showed it could be done . It was an amazing journey .
Let me ask you a question .
How many of you have had the experience of being in a strange neighborhood , or strange land , and a total stranger , perfect stranger , comes up to you and shows you some kindness , maybe invites you into their home , gives you a drink , gives you a coffee , gives you a meal ?
How many of you have ever had that experience ?
Thats the essence of the Abraham path .
But thats what you discover , is you go into these villages in the Middle East where you expect hostility , and you get the most amazing hospitality , all associated with Abraham .
 In the name of father Abraham , let me offer you some food . 
So what we discovered is that Abraham is not just a figure out of a book for those people .
Hes alive ; hes a living presence .
And to make a long story short , in the last couple of years now , thousands of people have begun to walk parts of the path of Abraham in the Middle East , enjoying the hospitality of the people there .
Theyve begun to walk in Israel and Palestine , in Jordan , in Turkey , in Syria .
Its an amazing experience .
Men , women , young people , old people  -  -  more women than men , actually , interestingly .
For those who cant walk , who are unable to get there right now , people started to organize walks in cities , in their own communities .
In Cincinnati , for instance , that organized a walk from a church to a mosque to a synagogue and all had an Abrahamic meal together .
It was Abraham Path Day .
In Sao Paulo , Brazil , its become an annual event for thousands of people to run in a virtual Abraham Path Run , uniting the different communities .
The media love it ; they really adore it .
They lavish attention on it because its visual , and it spreads the idea , this idea of Abrahamic hospitality of kindness towards strangers .
And just a couple weeks ago , there was an NPR story on it .
Last month , there was a piece in the Guardian , in the Manchester Guardian , about it  -  -  two whole pages .
And they quoted a villager who said ,  This walk connects us to the world . 
He said it was like a light that went on in our lives .
It brought us hope .
And so thats what its about .
But its not just about psychology ; its about economics , because as people walk they spend money .
And this woman right here , Um Ahmad , is a woman who lives on a path in Northern Jordan .
Shes desperately poor .
Shes partially blind , her husband cant work , shes got seven kids .
But what she can do is cook , and so shes begun to cook for some groups of walkers who come through the village and have a meal in her home .
They sit on the floor .
She doesnt even have a tablecloth .
She makes the most delicious food thats fresh from the herbs in the surrounding countryside .
And so more and more walkers have come , and lately shes begun to earn an income to support her family .
And so she told our team there , she said ,  You have made me visible in a village where people were once ashamed to look at me . 
Thats the potential of the Abraham path .
There are literally hundreds of those kinds of communities across the Middle East , across the path .
The potential is basically to change the game .
And to change the game , you have to change the frame , the way we see things  -  -  to change the frame from hostility to hospitality , from terrorism to tourism .
And in that sense , the Abraham path is a game - changer .
Let me just show you one thing .
I have a little acorn here that I picked up while I was walking on the path earlier this year .
Now the acorn is associated with the oak tree , of course  -  -  grows into an oak tree , which is associated with Abraham .
The path right now is like an acorn ; its still in its early phase .
What would the oak tree look like ?
Well I think back to my childhood , a good part of which I spent , after being born here in Chicago , I spent in Europe .
If you had been in the ruins of , say , London in 1945 , or Berlin , and you had said ,  Sixty years from now , this is going to be the most peaceful , prosperous part of the planet ,  people would have thought you were certifiably insane .
But they did it thanks to a common identity  -  -  Europe  -  -  and a common economy .
So my question is , if it can be done in Europe , why not in the Middle East ?
Why not , thanks to a common identity , which is the story of Abraham , and thanks to a common economy that would be based in good part on tourism ?
So let me conclude then by saying that in the last 35 years , as Ive worked in some of the most dangerous , difficult and intractable conflicts around the planet , I have yet to see one conflict that I felt could not be transformed .
Its not easy , of course , but its possible .
It was done in South Africa .
It was done in Northern Ireland .
It could be done anywhere .
It simply depends on us .
It depends on us taking the third side .
So let me invite you to consider taking the third side , even as a very small step .
Were about to take a break in a moment .
Just go up to someone whos from a different culture , a different country , a different ethnicity , some difference , and engage them in a conversation ; listen to them .
Thats a third side act .
Thats walking Abrahams path .
After a TEDTalk , why not a TEDWalk ?
So let me just leave you with three things .
One is , the secret to peace is the third side .
The third side is us .
Each of us , with a single step , can take the world , can bring the world a step closer to peace .
Theres an old African proverb that goes :  When spider webs unite , they can halt even the lion . 
If were able to unite our third - side webs of peace , we can even halt the lion of war .
Thank you very much .
Shereen El Feki : A little - told tale of sex and sensuality
 If you really want to know a people , start by looking inside their bedrooms ,  says Shereen El Feki , who traveled through the Middle East for five years , talking to people about sex . While those conversations reflected rigid norms and deep repression , El Feki also discovered that sexual conservatism in the Arab world is a relatively new thing . She wonders : could a re - emergence of public dialogue lead to more satisfying , and safer , sex lives ?
So when I was in Morocco , in Casablanca , not so long ago , I met a young unmarried mother called Faiza .
Faiza showed me photos of her infant son and she told me the story of his conception , pregnancy , and delivery .
It was a remarkable tale , but Faiza saved the best for last .
 You know , I am a virgin ,  she told me .
 I have two medical certificates to prove it . 
This is the modern Middle East , where two millennia after the coming of Christ , virgin births are still a fact of life .
Faizas story is just one of hundreds Ive heard over the years , traveling across the Arab region talking to people about sex .
Now , I know this might sound like a dream job , or possibly a highly dubious occupation , but for me , its something else altogether .
Im half Egyptian , and Im Muslim .
But I grew up in Canada , far from my Arab roots .
Like so many who straddle East and West , Ive been drawn , over the years , to try to better understand my origins .
That I chose to look at sex comes from my background in HIV / AIDS , as a writer and a researcher and an activist .
Sex lies at the heart of an emerging epidemic in the Middle East and North Africa , which is one of only two regions in the world where HIV / AIDS is still on the rise .
Now sexuality is an incredibly powerful lens with which to study any society , because what happens in our intimate lives is reflected by forces on a bigger stage : in politics and economics , in religion and tradition , in gender and generations .
As I found , if you really want to know a people , you start by looking inside their bedrooms .
Now to be sure , the Arab world is vast and varied .
But running across it are three red lines  -  -  these are topics you are not supposed to challenge in word or deed .
The first of these is politics .
But the Arab Spring has changed all that , in uprisings which have blossomed across the region since 2011 .
Now while those in power , old and new , continue to cling to business as usual , millions are still pushing back , and pushing forward to what they hope will be a better life .
That second red line is religion .
But now religion and politics are connected , with the rise of such groups as the Muslim Brotherhood .
And some people , at least , are starting to ask questions about the role of Islam in public and private life .
You know , as for that third red line , that off - limits subject , what do you think it might be ?
Audience : Sex .
Shereen El Feki : Louder , I cant hear you .
Audience : Sex .
SEF : Again , please dont be shy .
Audience : Sex .
SEF : Absolutely , thats right , its sex .
Across the Arab region , the only accepted context for sex is marriage  -  -  approved by your parents , sanctioned by religion and registered by the state .
Marriage is your ticket to adulthood .
If you dont tie the knot , you cant move out of your parents place , and youre not supposed to be having sex , and youre definitely not supposed to be having children .
Its a social citadel ; its an impregnable fortress which resists any assault , any alternative .
And around the fortress is this vast field of taboo against premarital sex , against condoms , against abortion , against homosexuality , you name it .
Faiza was living proof of this .
Her virginity statement was not a piece of wishful thinking .
Although the major religions of the region extoll premarital chastity , in a patriarchy , boys will be boys .
Men have sex before marriage , and people more or less turn a blind eye .
Not so for women , who are expected to be virgins on their wedding night  -  -  that is , to turn up with your hymen intact .
This is not a question of individual concern , this is a matter of family honor , and in particular , mens honor .
And so women and their relatives will go to great lengths to preserve this tiny piece of anatomy  -  -  from female genital mutilation , to virginity testing , to hymen repair surgery .
Faiza chose a different route : non - vaginal sex .
Only she became pregnant all the same .
But Faiza didnt actually realize this , because theres so little sexuality education in schools , and so little communication in the family .
When her condition became hard to hide , Faizas mother helped her flee her father and brothers .
This is because honor killings are a real threat for untold numbers of women in the Arab region .
And so when Faiza eventually fetched up at a hospital in Casablanca , the man who offered to help her , instead tried to rape her .
Sadly , Faiza is not alone .
In Egypt , where my research is focused , I have seen plenty of trouble in and out of the citadel .
There are legions of young men who cant afford to get married , because marriage has become a very expensive proposition .
They are expected to bear the burden of costs in married life , but they cant find jobs .
This is one of the major drivers of the recent uprisings , and it is one of the reasons for the rising age of marriage in much of the Arab region .
There are career women who want to get married , but cant find a husband , because they defy gender expectations , or as one young female doctor in Tunisia put it to me ,  The women , they are becoming more and more open .
But the man , he is still at the prehistoric stage . 
And then there are men and women who cross the heterosexual line , who have sex with their own sex , or who have a different gender identity .
They are on the receiving end of laws which punish their activities , even their appearance .
And they face a daily struggle with social stigma , with family despair , and with religious fire and brimstone .
Now , its not as if its all rosy in the marital bed either .
Couples who are looking for greater happiness , greater sexual happiness in their married lives , but are at a loss of how to achieve it , especially wives , who are afraid of being seen as bad women if they show some spark in the bedroom .
And then there are those whose marriages are actually a veil for prostitution .
They have been sold by their families , often to wealthy Arab tourists .
This is just one face of a booming sex trade across the Arab region .
Now raise your hand if any of this is sounding familiar to you , from your part of the world .
Yeah . Its not as if the Arab world has a monopoly on sexual hangups .
And although we dont yet have an Arab Kinsey Report to tell us exactly whats happening inside bedrooms across the Arab region , Its pretty clear that something is not right .
Double standards for men and women , sex as a source of shame , family control limiting individual choices , and a vast gulf between appearance and reality : what people are doing and what theyre willing to admit to , and a general reluctance to move beyond private whispers to a serious and sustained public discussion .
As one doctor in Cairo summed it up for me ,  Here , sex is the opposite of sport .
Football , everybody talks about it , but hardly anyone plays .
But sex , everybody is doing it , but nobody wants to talk about it . 
SEF : I want to give you a piece of advice , which if you follow it , will make you happy in life .
When your husband reaches out to you , when he seizes a part of your body , sigh deeply and look at him lustily .
When he penetrates you with his penis , try to talk flirtatiously and move yourself in harmony with him .
Hot stuff !
And it might sound that these handy hints come from  The Joy of Sex  or YouPorn .
But in fact , they come from a 10th - century Arabic book called  The Encyclopedia of Pleasure ,  which covers sex from aphrodisiacs to zoophilia , and everything in between .
The Encyclopedia is just one in a long line of Arabic erotica , much of it written by religious scholars .
Going right back to the Prophet Muhammad , there is a rich tradition in Islam of talking frankly about sex : not just its problems , but also its pleasures , and not just for men , but also for women .
A thousand years ago , we used to have whole dictionaries of sex in Arabic .
Words to cover every conceivable sexual feature , position and preference , a body of language that was rich enough to make up the body of the woman you see on this page .
Today , this history is largely unknown in the Arab region .
Even by educated people , who often feel more comfortable talking about sex in a foreign language than they do in their own tongue .
Todays sexual landscape looks a lot like Europe and America on the brink of the sexual revolution .
But while the West has opened on sex , what we found is that Arab societies appear to have been moving in the opposite direction .
In Egypt and many of its neighbors , this closing down is part of a wider closing in political , social and cultural thought .
And it is the product of a complex historical process , one which has gained ground with the rise of Islamic conservatism since the late 1970s .
 Just say no  is what conservatives around the world say to any challenge to the sexual status quo .
In the Arab region , they brand these attempts as a Western conspiracy to undermine traditional Arab and Islamic values .
But whats really at stake here is one of their most powerful tools of control : sex wrapped up in religion .
But history shows us that even as recently as our fathers and grandfathers day , there have been times of greater pragmatism , and tolerance , and a willingness to consider other interpretations : be it abortion , or masturbation , or even the incendiary topic of homosexuality .
It is not black and white , as conservatives would have us believe .
In these , as in so many other matters , Islam offers us at least 50 shades of gray .
Over my travels , Ive met men and women across the Arab region whove been exploring that spectrum  -  -  sexologists who are trying to help couples find greater happiness in their marriages , innovators who are managing to get sexuality education into schools , small groups of men and women , lesbian , gay , transgendered , transsexual , who are reaching out to their peers with online initiatives and real - world support .
Women , and increasingly men , who are starting to speak out and push back against sexual violence on the streets and in the home .
Groups that are trying to help sex workers protect themselves against HIV and other occupational hazards , and NGOs that are helping unwed mothers like Faiza find a place in society , and critically , stay with their kids .
Now these efforts are small , theyre often underfunded , and they face formidable opposition .
But I am optimistic that , in the long run , times are changing , and they and their ideas will gain ground .
Social change doesnt happen in the Arab region through dramatic confrontation , beating or indeed baring of breasts , but rather through negotiation .
What were talking here is not about a sexual revolution , but a sexual evolution , learning from other parts of the world , adapting to local conditions , forging our own path , not following one blazed by another .
That path , I hope , will one day lead us to the right to control our own bodies , and to access the information and services we need to lead satisfying and safe sexual lives .
The right to express our ideas freely , to marry whom we choose , to choose our own partners , to be sexually active or not , to decide whether to have children and when , all this without violence or force or discrimination .
Now we are very far from this across the Arab region , and so much needs to change : law , education , media , the economy , the list goes on and on , and it is the work of a generation , at least .
But it begins with a journey that I myself have made , asking hard questions of received wisdoms in sexual life .
And it is a journey which has only served to strengthen my faith , and my appreciation of local histories and cultures by showing me possibilities where I once only saw absolutes .
Now given the turmoil in many countries in the Arab region , talking about sex , challenging the taboos , seeking alternatives might sound like something of a luxury .
But at this critical moment in history , if we do not anchor freedom and justice , dignity and equality , privacy and autonomy in our personal lives , in our sexual lives , we will find it very hard to achieve in public life .
The political and the sexual are intimate bedfellows , and that is true for us all .
no matter where we live and love .
Thank you .
iO Tillett Wright : Fifty shades of gay
Artist iO Tillett Wright has photographed 2,000 people who consider themselves somewhere on the LGBTQ spectrum and asked many of them : Can you assign a percentage to how gay or straight you are ? Most people , it turns out , consider themselves to exist in the gray areas of sexuality , not 100 % gay or straight . Which presents a real problem when it comes to discrimination : Where do you draw the line ?
Human beings start putting each other into boxes the second that they see each other  -  -  Is that person dangerous ? Are they attractive ?
Are they a potential mate ? Are they a potential networking opportunity ?
We do this little interrogation when we meet people to make a mental resume for them .
Whats your name ? Where are you from ?
How old are you ? What do you do ?
Then we get more personal with it .
Have you ever had any diseases ?
Have you ever been divorced ?
Does your breath smell bad while youre answering my interrogation right now ?
What are you into ? Who are you into ?
What gender do you like to sleep with ?
I get it .
We are neurologically hardwired to seek out people like ourselves .
We start forming cliques as soon as were old enough to know what acceptance feels like .
We bond together based on anything that we can  -  -  music preference , race , gender , the block that we grew up on .
We seek out environments that reinforce our personal choices .
Sometimes , though , just the question  what do you do ? 
can feel like somebodys opening a tiny little box and asking you to squeeze yourself inside of it .
Because the categories , Ive found , are too limiting .
The boxes are too narrow .
And this can get really dangerous .
So heres a disclaimer about me , though , before we get too deep into this .
I grew up in a very sheltered environment .
I was raised in downtown Manhattan in the early 1980s , two blocks from the epicenter of punk music .
I was shielded from the pains of bigotry and the social restrictions of a religiously - based upbringing .
Where I come from , if you werent a drag queen or a radical thinker or a performance artist of some kind , you were the weirdo .
It was an unorthodox upbringing , but as a kid on the streets of New York , you learn how to trust your own instincts , you learn how to go with your own ideas .
So when I was six , I decided that I wanted to be a boy .
I went to school one day and the kids wouldnt let me play basketball with them .
They said they wouldnt let girls play .
So I went home , and I shaved my head , and I came back the next day and I said ,  Im a boy . 
I mean , who knows , right ?
When youre six , maybe you can do that .
I didnt want anyone to know that I was a girl , and they didnt .
I kept up the charade for eight years .
So this is me when I was 11 .
I was playing a kid named Walter in a movie called  Julian Po . 
I was a little street tough that followed Christian Slater around and badgered him .
See , I was also a child actor , which doubled up the layers of the performance of my identity , because no one knew that I was actually a girl really playing a boy .
In fact , no one in my life knew that I was a girl  -  -  not my teachers at school , not my friends , not the directors that I worked with .
Kids would often come up to me in class and grab me by the throat to check for an Adams apple or grab my crotch to check what I was working with .
When I would go to the bathroom , I would turn my shoes around in the stalls so that it looked like I was peeing standing up .
At sleepovers I would have panic attacks trying to break it to girls that they didnt want to kiss me without outing myself .
Its worth mentioning though that I didnt hate my body or my genitalia .
I didnt feel like I was in the wrong body .
I felt like I was performing this elaborate act .
I wouldnt have qualified as transgender .
If my family , though , had been the kind of people to believe in therapy , they probably would have diagnosed me as something like gender dysmorphic and put me on hormones to stave off puberty .
But in my particular case , I just woke up one day when I was 14 , and I decided that I wanted to be a girl again .
Puberty had hit , and I had no idea what being a girl meant , and I was ready to figure out who I actually was .
When a kid behaves like I did , they dont exactly have to come out , right ?
No one is exactly shocked .
But I wasnt asked to define myself by my parents .
When I was 15 , and I called my father to tell him that I had fallen in love , it was the last thing on either of our minds to discuss what the consequences were of the fact that my first love was a girl .
Three years later , when I fell in love with a man , neither of my parents batted an eyelash either .
See , its one of the great blessings of my very unorthodox childhood that I wasnt ever asked to define myself as any one thing at any point .
I was just allowed to be me , growing and changing in every moment .
So four , almost five years ago , Proposition 8 , the great marriage equality debate , was raising a lot of dust around this country .
And at the time , getting married wasnt really something I spent a lot of time thinking about .
But I was struck by the fact that America , a country with such a tarnished civil rights record , could be repeating its mistakes so blatantly .
And I remember watching the discussion on television and thinking how interesting it was that the separation of church and state was essentially drawing geographical boundaries throughout this country , between places where people believed in it and places where people didnt .
And then , that this discussion was drawing geographical boundaries around me .
If this was a war with two disparate sides , I , by default , fell on team gay , because I certainly wasnt 100 percent straight .
At the time I was just beginning to emerge from this eight - year personal identity crisis zigzag that saw me go from being a boy to being this awkward girl that looked like a boy in girls clothes to the opposite extreme of this super skimpy , over - compensating , boy - chasing girly - girl to finally just a hesitant exploration of what I actually was , a tomboyish girl who liked both boys and girls depending on the person .
I had spent a year photographing this new generation of girls , much like myself , who fell kind of between - the - lines  -  -  girls who skateboarded but did it in lacy underwear , girls who had boys haircuts but wore girly nail polish , girls who had eyeshadow to match their scraped knees , girls who liked girls and boys who all liked boys and girls who all hated being boxed in to anything .
I loved these people , and I admired their freedom , but I watched as the world outside of our utopian bubble exploded into these raging debates where pundits started likening our love to bestiality on national television .
And this powerful awareness rolled in over me that I was a minority , and in my own home country , based on one facet of my character .
I was legally and indisputably a second - class citizen .
I was not an activist .
I wave no flags in my own life .
But I was plagued by this question : How could anyone vote to strip the rights of the vast variety of people that I knew based on one element of their character ?
How could they say that we as a group were not deserving of equal rights as somebody else ?
Were we even a group ? What group ?
And had these people ever even consciously met a victim of their discrimination ?
Did they know who they were voting against and what the impact was ?
And then it occurred to me , perhaps if they could look into the eyes of the people that they were casting into second - class citizenship it might make it harder for them to do .
It might give them pause .
Obviously I couldnt get 20 million people to the same dinner party , so I figured out a way where I could introduce them to each other photographically without any artifice , without any lighting , or without any manipulation of any kind on my part .
Because in a photograph you can examine a lions whiskers without the fear of him ripping your face off .
For me , photography is not just about exposing film , its about exposing the viewer to something new , a place they havent gone before , but most importantly , to people that they might be afraid of .
Life magazine introduced generations of people to distant , far - off cultures they never knew existed through pictures .
So I decided to make a series of very simple portraits , mugshots if you will .
And I basically decided to photograph anyone in this country that was not 100 percent straight , which , if you dont know , is a limitless number of people .
So this was a very large undertaking , and to do it we needed some help .
So I ran out in the freezing cold , and I photographed every single person that I knew that I could get to in February of about two years ago .
And I took those photographs , and I went to the HRC and I asked them for some help .
And they funded two weeks of shooting in New York .
And then we made this .
Im iO Tillett Wright , and Im an artist born and raised in New York City .
Self Evident Truths is a photographic record of LGBTQ America today .
My aim is to take a simple portrait of anyone whos anything other than 100 percent straight or feels like they fall in the LGBTQ spectrum in any way .
My goal is to show the humanity that exists in every one of us through the simplicity of a face .
 We hold these truths to be self - evident that all men are created equal . 
Its written in the Declaration of Independence .
We are failing as a nation to uphold the morals upon which we were founded .
There is no equality in the United States .
  What does equality mean to you ?     Marriage     Freedom     Civil rights     Treat every person as youd treat yourself   Its when you dont have to think about it , simple as that .
The fight for equal rights is not just about gay marriage .
Today in 29 states , more than half of this country , you can legally be fired just for your sexuality .
  Who is responsible for equality ?   Ive heard hundreds of people give the same answer :  We are all responsible for equality . 
So far weve shot 300 faces in New York City .
And we wouldnt have been able to do any of it without the generous support of the Human Rights Campaign .
I want to take the project across the country .
I want to visit 25 American cities , and I want to shoot 4,000 or 5,000 people .
This is my contribution to the civil rights fight of my generation .
I challenge you to look into the faces of these people and tell them that they deserve less than any other human being .
Absolutely nothing could have prepared us for what happened after that .
Almost 85,000 people watched that video , and then they started emailing us from all over the country , asking us to come to their towns and help them to show their faces .
And a lot more people wanted to show their faces than I had anticipated .
So I changed my immediate goal to 10,000 faces .
That video was made in the spring of 2011 , and as of today I have traveled to almost 20 cities and photographed almost 2,000 people .
I know that this is a talk , but Id like to have a minute of just quiet and have you just look at these faces because there is nothing that I can say that will add to them .
Because if a picture is worth a thousand words , then a picture of a face needs a whole new vocabulary .
So after traveling and talking to people in places like Oklahoma or small - town Texas , we found evidence that the initial premise was dead on .
Visibility really is key .
Familiarity really is the gateway drug to empathy .
Once an issue pops up in your own backyard or amongst your own family , youre far more likely to explore sympathy for it or explore a new perspective on it .
Of course , in my travels I met people who legally divorced their children for being other than straight , but I also met people who were Southern Baptists who switched churches because their child was a lesbian .
Sparking empathy had become the backbone of Self Evident Truths .
But heres what I was starting to learn that was really interesting : Self Evident Truths doesnt erase the differences between us .
In fact , on the contrary , it highlights them .
It presents , not just the complexities found in a procession of different human beings , but the complexities found within each individual person .
It wasnt that we had too many boxes , it was that we had too few .
At some point I realized that my mission to photograph  gays  was inherently flawed , because there were a million different shades of gay .
Here I was trying to help , and I had perpetuated the very thing I had spent my life trying to avoid  -  -  yet another box .
At some point I added a question to the release form that asked people to quantify themselves on a scale of one to 100 percent gay .
And I watched so many existential crises unfold in front of me .
People didnt know what to do because they had never been presented with the option before .
Can you quantify your openness ?
Once they got over the shock , though , by and large people opted for somewhere between 70 to 95 percent or the 3 to 20 percent marks .
Of course , there were lots of people who opted for a 100 percent one or the other , but I found that a much larger proportion of people identified as something that was much more nuanced .
I found that most people fall on a spectrum of what I have come to refer to as  Grey . 
Let me be clear though  -  -  and this is very important  -  -  in no way am I saying that preference doesnt exist .
And I am not even going to address the issue of choice versus biological imperative , because if any of you happen to be of the belief that sexual orientation is a choice , I invite you to go out and try to be grey .
Ill take your picture just for trying .
What I am saying though is that human beings are not one - dimensional .
The most important thing to take from the percentage system is this : If you have gay people over here and you have straight people over here , and while we recognize that most people identify as somewhere closer to one binary or another , there is this vast spectrum of people that exist in between .
And the reality that this presents is a complicated one .
Because , for example , if you pass a law that allows a boss to fire an employee for homosexual behavior , where exactly do you draw the line ?
Is it over here , by the people who have had one or two heterosexual experiences so far ?
Or is it over here by the people who have only had one or two homosexual experiences thus far ?
Where exactly does one become a second - class citizen ?
Another interesting thing that I learned from my project and my travels is just what a poor binding agent sexual orientation is .
After traveling so much and meeting so many people , let me tell you , there are just as many jerks and sweethearts and Democrats and Republicans and jocks and queens and every other polarization you can possibly think of within the LGBT community as there are within the human race .
Aside from the fact that we play with one legal hand tied behind our backs , and once you get past the shared narrative of prejudice and struggle , just being other than straight doesnt necessarily mean that we have anything in common .
So in the endless proliferation of faces that Self Evident Truths is always becoming , as it hopefully appears across more and more platforms , bus shelters , billboards , Facebook pages , screen savers , perhaps in watching this procession of humanity , something interesting and useful will begin to happen .
Hopefully these categories , these binaries , these over - simplified boxes will begin to become useless and theyll begin to fall away .
Because really , they describe nothing that we see and no one that we know and nothing that we are .
What we see are human beings in all their multiplicity .
And seeing them makes it harder to deny their humanity .
At the very least I hope it makes it harder to deny their human rights .
So is it me particularly that you would choose to deny the right to housing , the right to adopt children , the right to marriage , the freedom to shop here , live here , buy here ?
Am I the one that you choose to disown as your child or your brother or your sister or your mother or your father , your neighbor , your cousin , your uncle , the president , your police woman or the fireman ?
Its too late .
Because I already am all of those things .
We already are all of those things , and we always have been .
So please dont greet us as strangers , greet us as your fellow human beings , period .
Thank you .
Andres Lozano : Parkinsons , depression and the switch that might turn them off
Deep brain stimulation is becoming very precise . This technique allows surgeons to place electrodes in almost any area of the brain , and turn them up or down  -  -  like a radio dial or thermostat  -  -  to correct dysfunction . Andres Lozano offers a dramatic look at emerging techniques , in which a woman with Parkinsons instantly stops shaking and brain areas eroded by Alzheimers are brought back to life .
One of the things I want to establish right from the start is that not all neurosurgeons wear cowboy boots .
I just wanted you to know that .
So I am indeed a neurosurgeon , and I follow a long tradition of neurosurgery , and what Im going to tell you about today is adjusting the dials in the circuits in the brain , being able to go anywhere in the brain and turning areas of the brain up or down to help our patients .
So as I said , neurosurgery comes from a long tradition .
Its been around for about 7,000 years .
In Mesoamerica , there used to be neurosurgery , and there were these neurosurgeons that used to treat patients .
And they were trying to  -  -  they knew that the brain was involved in neurological and psychiatric disease .
They didnt know exactly what they were doing .
Not much has changed , by the way .
But they thought that , if you had a neurologic or psychiatric disease , it must be because you are possessed by an evil spirit .
So if you are possessed by an evil spirit causing neurologic or psychiatric problems , then the way to treat this is , of course , to make a hole in your skull and let the evil spirit escape .
So this was the thinking back then , and these individuals made these holes .
Sometimes the patients were a little bit reluctant to go through this because , you can tell that the holes are made partially and then , I think , there was some trepanation , and then they left very quickly and it was only a partial hole , and we know they survived these procedures .
But this was common .
There were some sites where one percent of all the skulls have these holes , and so you can see that neurologic and psychiatric disease is quite common , and it was also quite common about 7,000 years ago .
Now , in the course of time , weve come to realize that different parts of the brain do different things .
So there are areas of the brain that are dedicated to controlling your movement or your vision or your memory or your appetite , and so on .
And when things work well , then the nervous system works well , and everything functions .
But once in a while , things dont go so well , and theres trouble in these circuits , and there are some rogue neurons that are misfiring and causing trouble , or sometimes theyre underactive and theyre not quite working as they should .
Now , the manifestation of this depends on where in the brain these neurons are .
So when these neurons are in the motor circuit , you get dysfunction in the movement system , and you get things like Parkinsons disease .
When the malfunction is in a circuit that regulates your mood , you get things like depression , and when it is in a circuit that controls your memory and cognitive function , then you get things like Alzheimers disease .
So what weve been able to do is to pinpoint where these disturbances are in the brain , and weve been able to intervene within these circuits in the brain to either turn them up or turn them down .
So this is very much like choosing the correct station on the radio dial .
Once you choose the right station , whether it be jazz or opera , in our case whether it be movement or mood , we can put the dial there , and then we can use a second button to adjust the volume , to turn it up or turn it down .
So what Im going to tell you about is using the circuitry of the brain to implant electrodes and turning areas of the brain up and down to see if we can help our patients .
And this is accomplished using this kind of device , and this is called deep brain stimulation .
So what were doing is placing these electrodes throughout the brain .
Again , we are making holes in the skull about the size of a dime , putting an electrode in , and then this electrode is completely underneath the skin down to a pacemaker in the chest , and with a remote control very much like a television remote control , we can adjust how much electricity we deliver to these areas of the brain .
We can turn it up or down , on or off .
Now , about a hundred thousand patients in the world have received deep brain stimulation , and Im going to show you some examples of using deep brain stimulation to treat disorders of movement , disorders of mood and disorders of cognition .
So this looks something like this when its in the brain .
You see the electrode going through the skull into the brain and resting there , and we can place this really anywhere in the brain .
I tell my friends that no neuron is safe from a neurosurgeon , because we can really reach just about anywhere in the brain quite safely now .
Now the first example Im going to show you is a patient with Parkinsons disease , and this lady has Parkinsons disease , and she has these electrodes in her brain , and Im going to show you what shes like when the electrodes are turned off and she has her Parkinsons symptoms , and then were going to turn it on .
So this looks something like this .
The electrodes are turned off now , and you can see that she has tremor .
Okay . I cant . Can you try to touch my finger ?
Thats a little better . That side is better .
Were now going to turn it on .
Its on . Just turned it on .
And this works like that , instantly .
And the difference between shaking in this way and not  -  -  The difference between shaking in this way and not is related to the misbehavior of 25,000 neurons in her subthalamic nucleus .
So we now know how to find these troublemakers and tell them ,  Gentlemen , thats enough .
We want you to stop doing that . 
And we do that with electricity .
So we use electricity to dictate how they fire , and we try to block their misbehavior using electricity .
So in this case , we are suppressing the activity of abnormal neurons .
We started using this technique in other problems , and Im going to tell you about a fascinating problem that we encountered , a case of dystonia .
So dystonia is a disorder affecting children .
Its a genetic disorder , and it involves a twisting motion , and these children get progressively more and more twisting until they cant breathe , until they get sores , urinary infections , and then they die .
So back in 1997 , I was asked to see this young boy , perfectly normal . He has this genetic form of dystonia .
There are eight children in the family .
Five of them have dystonia .
So here he is .
This boy is nine years old , perfectly normal until the age six , and then he started twisting his body , first the right foot , then the left foot , then the right arm , then the left arm , then the trunk , and then by the time he arrived , within the course of one or two years of the disease onset , he could no longer walk , he could no longer stand .
He was crippled , and indeed the natural progression as this gets worse is for them to become progressively twisted , progressively disabled , and many of these children do not survive .
So he is one of five kids .
The only way he could get around was crawling on his belly like this .
He did not respond to any drugs .
We did not know what to do with this boy .
We did not know what operation to do , where to go in the brain , but on the basis of our results in Parkinsons disease , we reasoned , why dont we try to suppress the same area in the brain that we suppressed in Parkinsons disease , and lets see what happens ?
So here he was . We operated on him hoping that he would get better . We did not know .
So here he is now , back in Israel where he lives , three months after the procedure , and here he is .
On the basis of this result , this is now a procedure thats done throughout the world , and there have been hundreds of children that have been helped with this kind of surgery .
This boy is now in university and leads quite a normal life .
This has been one of the most satisfying cases that I have ever done in my entire career , to restore movement and walking to this kind of child .
We realized that perhaps we could use this technology not only in circuits that control your movement but also circuits that control other things , and the next thing that we took on was circuits that control your mood .
And we decided to take on depression , and the reason we took on depression is because its so prevalent , and as you know , there are many treatments for depression , with medication and psychotherapy , even electroconvulsive therapy , but there are millions of people , and there are still 10 or 20 percent of patients with depression that do not respond , and it is these patients that we want to help .
And lets see if we can use this technique to help these patients with depression .
So the first thing we did was , we compared , whats different in the brain of someone with depression and someone who is normal , and what we did was PET scans to look at the blood flow of the brain , and what we noticed is that in patients with depression compared to normals , areas of the brain are shut down , and those are the areas in blue .
So here you really have the blues , and the areas in blue are areas that are involved in motivation , in drive and decision - making , and indeed , if youre severely depressed as these patients were , those are impaired . You lack motivation and drive .
The other thing we discovered was an area that was overactive , area 25 , seen there in red , and area 25 is the sadness center of the brain .
If I make any of you sad , for example , I make you remember the last time you saw your parent before they died or a friend before they died , this area of the brain lights up .
It is the sadness center of the brain .
And so patients with depression have hyperactivity .
The area of the brain for sadness is on red hot .
The thermostat is set at 100 degrees , and the other areas of the brain , involved in drive and motivation , are shut down .
So we wondered , can we place electrodes in this area of sadness and see if we can turn down the thermostat , can we turn down the activity , and what will be the consequence of that ?
So we went ahead and implanted electrodes in patients with depression .
This is work done with my colleague Helen Mayberg from Emory .
And we placed electrodes in area 25 , and in the top scan you see before the operation , area 25 , the sadness area is red hot , and the frontal lobes are shut down in blue , and then , after three months of continuous stimulation , 24 hours a day , or six months of continuous stimulation , we have a complete reversal of this .
Were able to drive down area 25 , down to a more normal level , and were able to turn back online the frontal lobes of the brain , and indeed were seeing very striking results in these patients with severe depression .
So now we are in clinical trials , and are in Phase III clinical trials , and this may become a new procedure , if its safe and we find that its effective , to treat patients with severe depression .
Ive shown you that we can use deep brain stimulation to treat the motor system in cases of Parkinsons disease and dystonia .
Ive shown you that we can use it to treat a mood circuit in cases of depression .
Can we use deep brain stimulation to make you smarter ?
Anybody interested in that ?
Of course we can , right ?
So what weve decided to do is were going to try to turbocharge the memory circuits in the brain .
Were going to place electrodes within the circuits that regulate your memory and cognitive function to see if we can turn up their activity .
Now were not going to do this in normal people .
Were going to do this in people that have cognitive deficits , and weve chosen to treat patients with Alzheimers disease who have cognitive and memory deficits .
As you know , this is the main symptom of early onset Alzheimers disease .
So weve placed electrodes within this circuit in an area of the brain called the fornix , which is the highway in and out of this memory circuit , with the idea to see if we can turn on this memory circuit , and whether that can , in turn , help these patients with Alzheimers disease .
Now it turns out that in Alzheimers disease , theres a huge deficit in glucose utilization in the brain .
The brain is a bit of a hog when it comes to using glucose .
It uses 20 percent of all your  -  -  even though it only weighs two percent  -  -  it uses 10 times more glucose than it should based on its weight .
Twenty percent of all the glucose in your body is used by the brain , and as you go from being normal to having mild cognitive impairment , which is a precursor for Alzheimers , all the way to Alzheimers disease , then there are areas of the brain that stop using glucose .
They shut down . They turn off .
And indeed , what we see is that these areas in red around the outside ribbon of the brain are progressively getting more and more blue until they shut down completely .
This is analogous to having a power failure in an area of the brain , a regional power failure .
So the lights are out in parts of the brain in patients with Alzheimers disease , and the question is , are the lights out forever , or can we turn the lights back on ?
Can we get those areas of the brain to use glucose once again ?
So this is what we did . We implanted electrodes in the fornix of patients with Alzheimers disease , we turned it on , and we looked at what happens to glucose use in the brain .
And indeed , at the top , youll see before the surgery , the areas in blue are the areas that use less glucose than normal , predominantly the parietal and temporal lobes .
These areas of the brain are shut down .
The lights are out in these areas of the brain .
We then put in the DBS electrodes and we wait for a month or a year , and the areas in red represent the areas where we increase glucose utilization .
And indeed , we are able to get these areas of the brain that were not using glucose to use glucose once again .
So the message here is that , in Alzheimers disease , the lights are out , but there is someone home , and were able to turn the power back on to these areas of the brain , and as we do so , we expect that their functions will return .
So this is now in clinical trials .
We are going to operate on 50 patients with early Alzheimers disease to see whether this is safe and effective , whether we can improve their neurologic function .
So the message I want to leave you with today is that , indeed , there are several circuits in the brain that are malfunctioning across various disease states , whether were talking about Parkinsons disease , depression , schizophrenia , Alzheimers .
We are now learning to understand what are the circuits , what are the areas of the brain that are responsible for the clinical signs and the symptoms of those diseases .
We can now reach those circuits .
We can introduce electrodes within those circuits .
We can graduate the activity of those circuits .
We can turn them down if they are overactive , if theyre causing trouble , trouble that is felt throughout the brain , or we can turn them up if they are underperforming , and in so doing , we think that we may be able to help the overall function of the brain .
The implications of this , of course , is that we may be able to modify the symptoms of the disease , but I havent told you but theres also some evidence that we might be able to help the repair of damaged areas of the brain using electricity , and this is something for the future , to see if , indeed , we not only change the activity but also some of the reparative functions of the brain can be harvested .
So I envision that were going to see a great expansion of indications of this technique .
Were going to see electrodes being placed for many disorders of the brain .
One of the most exciting things about this is that , indeed , it involves multidisciplinary work .
It involves the work of engineers , of imaging scientists , of basic scientists , of neurologists , psychiatrists , neurosurgeons , and certainly at the interface of these multiple disciplines that theres the excitement .
And I think that we will see that we will be able to chase more of these evil spirits out from the brain as time goes on , and the consequence of that , of course , will be that we will be able to help many more patients .
Thank you very much .
Damon Horowitz : Philosophy in prison
Damon Horowitz teaches philosophy through the Prison University Project , bringing college - level classes to inmates of San Quentin State Prison . In this powerful short talk , he tells the story of an encounter with right and wrong that quickly gets personal .
Meet Tony . Hes my student .
Hes about my age , and hes in San Quentin State Prison .
When Tony was 16 years old , one day , one moment ,  It was moms gun .
Just flash it , scare the guy . Hes a punk .
He took some money ; well take his money . Thatll teach him .
Then last minute , Im thinking , Cant do this . This is wrong . My buddy says , Cmon , lets do this . I say , Lets do this .  And those three words , Tonys going to remember , because the next thing he knows , he hears the pop .
Theres the punk on the ground , puddle of blood .
And thats felony murder  -  -  25 to life , parole at 50 if youre lucky , and Tonys not feeling very lucky .
So when we meet in my philosophy class in his prison and I say ,  In this class , we will discuss the foundations of ethics ,  Tony interrupts me .
 What are you going to teach me about right and wrong ?
I know what is wrong . I have done wrong .
I am told every day , by every face I see , every wall I face , that I am wrong .
If I ever get out of here , there will always be a mark by my name .
Im a convict ; I am branded wrong . What are you going to tell me about right and wrong ? 
So I say to Tony ,  Sorry , but its worse than you think .
You think you know right and wrong ?
Then can you tell me what wrong is ?
No , dont just give me an example .
I want to know about wrongness itself , the idea of wrong .
What is that idea ?
What makes something wrong ?
How do we know that its wrong ? Maybe you and I disagree .
Maybe one of us is wrong about the wrong .
Maybe its you , maybe its me  -  -  but were not here to trade opinions ; everyones got an opinion .
We are here for knowledge .
Our enemy is thoughtlessness . This is philosophy . 
And something changes for Tony .
 Could be Im wrong . Im tired of being wrong .
I want to know what is wrong .
I want to know what I know . 
What Tony sees in that moment is the project of philosophy , the project that begins in wonder  -  -  what Kant called  admiration and awe at the starry sky above and the moral law within . 
What can creatures like us know of such things ?
It is the project that always takes us back to the condition of existence  -  -  what Heidegger called  the always already there . 
It is the project of questioning what we believe and why we believe it  -  -  what Socrates called  the examined life . 
Socrates , a man wise enough to know that he knows nothing .
Socrates died in prison , his philosophy intact .
So Tony starts doing his homework .
He learns his whys and wherefores , his causes and correlations , his logic , his fallacies .
Turns out , Tonys got the philosophy muscle .
His body is in prison , but his mind is free .
Tony learns about the ontologically promiscuous , the epistemologically anxious , the ethically dubious , the metaphysically ridiculous .
Thats Plato , Descartes , Nietzsche and Bill Clinton .
So when he gives me his final paper , in which he argues that the categorical imperative is perhaps too uncompromising to deal with the conflict that affects our everyday and challenges me to tell him whether therefore we are condemned to moral failure , I say ,  I dont know .
Let us think about that . 
Because in that moment , theres no mark by Tonys name ; its just the two of us standing there .
It is not professor and convict , it is just two minds ready to do philosophy .
And I say to Tony ,  Lets do this . 
Thank you .
Halla Tomasdottir : A feminine response to Icelands financial crash
Halla Tomasdottir managed to take her company Audur Capital through the eye of the financial storm in Iceland by applying 5 traditionally  feminine  values to financial services . At TEDWomen , she talks about these values and the importance of balance .
It sure used to be a lot easier to be from Iceland , because until a couple of years ago , people knew hardly anything about us , and I could basically come out here and say only good things about us .
But in the last couple of years weve become infamous for a couple of things .
First , of course , the economic meltdown .
It actually got so bad that somebody put our country up for sale on eBay .
Ninety - nine pence was the starting price and no reserve .
Then there was the volcano that interrupted the travel plans of almost all of you and many of your friends , including President Obama .
By the way , the pronunciation is  Eyjafjallajokull . 
None of your media got it right .
But Im not here to share these stories about these two things exactly .
Im here to tell you the story of Audur Capital , which is a financial firm founded by me and Kristin  -  -  who you see in the picture  -  -  in the spring of 2007 , just over a year before the economic collapse hit .
Why would two women who were enjoying successful careers in investment banking in the corporate sector leave to found a financial services firm ?
Well let it suffice to say that we felt a bit overwhelmed with testosterone .
And Im not here to say that men are to blame for the crisis and what happened in my country .
But I can surely tell you that in my country , much like on Wall Street and the city of London and elsewhere , men were at the helm of the game of the financial sector , and that kind of lack of diversity and sameness leads to disastrous problems .
So we decided , a bit fed - up with this world and also with the strong feeling in our stomach that this wasnt sustainable , to found a financial services firm based on our values , and we decided to incorporate feminine values into the world of finance .
Raised quite a few eyebrows in Iceland .
We werent known as the typical  women  women in Iceland up until then .
So it was almost like coming out of the closet to actually talk about the fact that we were women and that we believed that we had a set of values and a way of doing business that would be more sustainable than what we had experienced until then .
And we got a great group of people to join us  -  -  principled people with great skills , and investors with a vision and values to match ours .
And together we got through the eye of the financial storm in Iceland without taking any direct losses to our equity or to the funds of our clients .
And although I want to thank the talented people of our company foremost for that  -  -  and also theres a factor of luck and timing  -  -  we are absolutely convinced that we did this because of our values .
So let me share with you our values .
We believe in risk awareness .
What does that mean ?
We believe that you should always understand the risks that youre taking , and we will not invest in things we dont understand .
Not a complicated thing .
But in 2007 , at the height of the sub - prime and all the complicated financial structures , it was quite opposite to the reckless risk - taking behaviors that we saw on the market .
We also believe in straight - talking , telling it as it is , using simple language that people understand , telling people about the downsides as well as the potential upsides , and even telling the bad news that no one wants to utter , like our lack of belief in the sustainability of the Icelandic financial sector that already we had months before the collapse hit us .
And , although we do work in the financial sector , where Excel is king , we believe in emotional capital .
And we believe that doing emotional due diligence is just as important as doing financial due diligence .
It is actually people that make money and lose money , not Excel spreadsheets .
Last , but not least , we believe in profit with principles .
We care how we make our profit .
So while we want to make economic profit for ourselves and our customers , we are willing to do it with a long - term view , and we like to have a wider definition of profits than just the economic profit in the next quarter .
So we like to see profits , plus positive social and environmental benefits , when we invest .
But it wasnt just about the values , although we are convinced that they matter .
It was also about a business opportunity .
Its the female trend , and its the sustainability trend , that are going to create some of the most interesting investment opportunities in the years to come .
The whole thing about the female trend is not about women being better than men ; it is actually about women being different from men , bringing different values and different ways to the table .
So what do you get ? You get better decision - making , and you get less herd behavior , and both of those things hit your bottom line with very positive results .
But one has to wonder , now that weve had this financial sector collapse upon us in Iceland  -  -  and by the way , Europe looks pretty bad right now , and many would say that you in America are heading for some more trouble as well .
Now that weve had all that happen , and we have all this data out there telling us that its much better to have diversity around the decision - making tables , will we see business and finance change ?
Will government change ?
Well Ill give you my straight talk about this .
I have days that I believe , but I have days that Im full of doubt .
Have you seen the incredible urge out there to rebuild the very things that failed us ?
Einstein said that this was the definition of insanity  -  -  to do the same things over and over again , hoping for a different outcome .
So I guess the world is insane , because I see entirely too much of doing the same things over and over again , hoping that this time its not going to collapse upon us .
I want to see more revolutionary thinking , and I remain hopeful .
Like TED , I believe in people .
And I know that consumers are becoming more conscious , and they are going to start voting with their wallets , and they are going to change the face of business and finance from the outside , if they dont do it from the inside .
But Im more of the revolutionary , and I should be ; Im from Iceland .
We have a long history of strong , courageous , independent women , ever since the Viking age .
And I want to tell you when I first realized that women matter to the economy and to the society , I was seven  -  -  it happened to be my mothers birthday  -  -  October 24 , 1975 .
Women in Iceland took the day off .
From work or from home , they took the day off , and nothing worked in Iceland .
They marched into the center of Reykjavik , and they put womens issues onto the agenda .
And some say this was the start of a global movement .
For me it was the start of a long journey , but I decided that day to matter .
Five years later , Iceland elected Vigdis Finnbogadottir as their president  -  -  first female to become head of state , single mom , a breast cancer survivor who had had one of her breasts removed .
And at one of the campaign sessions , she had one of her male contenders allude to the fact that she couldnt become president  -  -  she was a woman , and even half a woman .
That night she won the election , because she came back  -  -  not just because of his crappy behavior  -  -  but she came back and said ,  Well , Im actually not going to breastfeed the Icelandic nation ; Im going to lead it . 
So Ive had incredibly many women role models that have influenced who I am and where I am today .
But in spite of that , I went through the first 10 or 15 years of my career mostly in denial of being a woman .
Started in corporate America , and I was absolutely convinced that it was just about the individual , that women and men would have just the same opportunities .
But Ive come to conclude lately that it isnt like that .
We are not the same , and its great . Because of our differences , we create and sustain life .
So we should embrace our difference and aim for challenge .
The final thought I want to leave with you is that Im fed up with this tyranny of either / or choices in life  -  -  either its men or its women .
We need to start embracing the beauty of balance .
So lets move away from thinking about business here and philanthropy there , and lets start thinking about doing good business .
Thats how we change the world . Thats the only sustainable future .
Thank you .
Kate Hartman : The art of wearable communication
Artist Kate Hartman uses wearable electronics to explore how we communicate , with ourselves and with the world . In this quirky and thought - provoking talk , she shows the  Talk to Yourself Hat  , the  Inflatable Heart  , the  Glacier Embracing Suit  , and other unexpected devices .
My name is Kate Hartman .
And I like to make devices that play with the ways that we relate and communicate .
So Im specifically interested in how we , as humans , relate to ourselves , each other and the world around us .
So just to give you a bit of context , as June said , Im an artist , a technologist and an educator .
I teach courses in physical computing and wearable electronics .
And much of what I do is either wearable or somehow related to the human form .
And so anytime I talk about what I do , I like to just quickly address the reason why bodies matter .
And its pretty simple .
Everybodys got one  -  -  all of you .
I can guarantee , everyone in this room , all of you over there , the people in the cushy seats , the people up top with the laptops  -  -  we all have bodies .
Dont be ashamed .
Its something that we have in common and they act as our primary interfaces for the world .
And so when working as an interaction designer , or as an artist who deals with participation  -  -  creating things that live on , in or around the human form  -  -  its really a powerful space to work within .
So within my own work , I use a broad range of materials and tools .
So I communicate through everything from radio transceivers to funnels and plastic tubing .
And to tell you a bit about the things that I make , the easiest place to start the story is with a hat .
And so it all started several years ago , late one night when I was sitting on the subway , riding home , and I was thinking .
And I tend to be a person who thinks too much and talks too little .
And so I was thinking about how it might be great if I could just take all these noises  -  -  like all these sounds of my thoughts in my head  -  -  if I could just physically extricate them and pull them out in such a form that I could share them with somebody else .
And so I went home , and I made a prototype of this hat .
And I called it the Muttering Hat , because it emitted these muttering noises that were kind of tethered to you , but you could detach them and share them with somebody else .
So I make other hats as well .
This one is called the Talk to Yourself Hat .
Its fairly self - explanatory .
It physically carves out conversation space for one .
And when you speak out loud , the sound of your voice is actually channeled back into your own ears .
And so when I make these things , its really not so much about the object itself , but rather the negative space around the object .
So what happens when a person puts this thing on ?
What kind of an experience do they have ?
And how are they transformed by wearing it ?
So many of these devices really kind of focus on the ways in which we relate to ourselves .
So this particular device is called the Gut Listener .
And it is a tool that actually enables one to listen to their own innards .
And so some of these things are actually more geared toward expression and communication .
And so the Inflatable Heart is an external organ that can be used by the wearer to express themselves .
So they can actually inflate it and deflate it according to their emotions .
So they can express everything from admiration and lust to anxiety and angst .
And some of these are actually meant to mediate experiences .
So the Discommunicator is a tool for arguments .
And so actually it allows for an intense emotional exchange , but is serves to absorb the specificity of the words that are delivered .
And in the end , some of these things just act as invitations .
So the Ear Bender literally puts something out there so someone can grab your ear and say what they have to say .
So even though Im really interested in the relationship between people , I also consider the ways in which we relate to the world around us .
And so when I was first living in New York City a few years back , I was thinking a lot about the familiar architectural forms that surrounded me and how I would like to better relate to them .
And I thought ,  Well , hey !
Maybe if I want to better relate to walls , maybe I need to be more wall - like myself . 
So I made a wearable wall that I could wear as a backpack .
And so I would put it on and sort of physically transform myself so that I could either contribute to or critique the spaces that surrounded me .
And so jumping off of that , thinking beyond the built environment into the natural world , I have this ongoing project called Botanicalls  -  -  which actually enables houseplants to tap into human communication protocols .
So when a plant is thirsty , it can actually make a phone call or post a message to a service like Twitter .
And so this really shifts the human / plant dynamic , because a single house plant can actually express its needs to thousands of people at the same time .
And so kind of thinking about scale , my most recent obsession is actually with glaciers  -  -  of course .
And so glaciers are these magnificent beings , and theres lots of reasons to be obsessed with them , but what Im particularly interested in is in human - glacier relations .
Because there seems to be an issue .
The glaciers are actually leaving us .
Theyre both shrinking and retreating  -  -  and some of them have disappeared altogether .
And so I actually live in Canada now , so Ive been visiting one of my local glaciers .
And this ones particularly interesting , because , of all the glaciers in North America , it receives the highest volume of human traffic in a year .
They actually have these buses that drive up and over the lateral moraine and drop people off on the surface of the glacier .
And this has really gotten me thinking about this experience of the initial encounter .
When I meet a glacier for the very first time , what do I do ?
Theres no kind of social protocol for this .
I really just dont even know how to say hello .
Do I carve a message in the snow ?
Or perhaps I can assemble one out of dot and dash ice cubes  -  -  ice cube Morse code .
Or perhaps I need to make myself a speaking tool , like an icy megaphone that I can use to amplify my voice when I direct it at the ice .
But really the most satisfying experience Ive had is the act of listening , which is what we need in any good relationship .
And I was really struck by how much it affected me .
This very basic shift in my physical orientation helped me shift my perspective in relation to the glacier .
And so since we use devices to figure out how to relate to the world these days , I actually made a device called the Glacier Embracing Suit .
And so this is constructed out of a heat reflected material that serves to mediate the difference in temperature between the human body and the glacial ice .
And once again , its this invitation that asks people to lay down on the glacier and give it a hug .
So , yea , this is actually just the beginning .
These are initial musings for this project .
And just as with the wall , how I wanted to be more wall - like , with this project , Id actually like to take more a of glacial pace .
And so my intent is to actually just take the next 10 years and go on a series of collaborative projects where I work with people from different disciplines  -  -  artists , technologists , scientists  -  -  to kind of work on this project of how we can improve human - glacier relations .
So beyond that , in closing , Id just like to say that were in this era of communications and device proliferation , and its really tremendous and exciting and sexy , but I think whats really important is thinking about how we can simultaneously maintain a sense of wonder and a sense of criticality about the tools that we use and the ways in which we relate to the world .
Thanks .
Miguel Nicolelis : A monkey that controls a robot with its thoughts . No , really .
Can we use our brains to directly control machines ? Miguel Nicolelis suggests yes , showing how a clever monkey in the US learned to control a robot arm in Japan purely with its thoughts . The research has big implications for quadraplegic people  -  -  and in fact , it powered the exoskeleton that kicked off the 2014 World Cup .
The kind of neuroscience that I do and my colleagues do is almost like the weatherman .
We are always chasing storms .
We want to see and measure storms  -  -  brainstorms , that is .
And we all talk about brainstorms in our daily lives , but we rarely see or listen to one .
So I always like to start these talks by actually introducing you to one of them .
Actually , the first time we recorded more than one neuron  -  -  a hundred brain cells simultaneously  -  -  we could measure the electrical sparks of a hundred cells in the same animal , this is the first image we got , the first 10 seconds of this recording .
So we got a little snippet of a thought , and we could see it in front of us .
I always tell the students that we could also call neuroscientists some sort of astronomer , because we are dealing with a system that is only comparable in terms of number of cells to the number of galaxies that we have in the universe .
And here we are , out of billions of neurons , just recording , 10 years ago , a hundred .
We are doing a thousand now .
And we hope to understand something fundamental about our human nature .
Because , if you dont know yet , everything that we use to define what human nature is comes from these storms , comes from these storms that roll over the hills and valleys of our brains and define our memories , our beliefs , our feelings , our plans for the future .
Everything that we ever do , everything that every human has ever done , do or will do , requires the toil of populations of neurons producing these kinds of storms .
And the sound of a brainstorm , if youve never heard one , is somewhat like this .
You can put it louder if you can .
My son calls this  making popcorn while listening to a badly - tuned a.m . station . 
This is a brain .
This is what happens when you route these electrical storms to a loudspeaker and you listen to a hundred brain cells firing , your brain will sound like this  -  -  my brain , any brain .
And what we want to do as neuroscientists in this time is to actually listen to these symphonies , these brain symphonies , and try to extract from them the messages they carry .
In particular , about 12 years ago we created a preparation that we named brain - machine interfaces .
And you have a scheme here that describes how it works .
The idea is , lets have some sensors that listen to these storms , this electrical firing , and see if you can , in the same time that it takes for this storm to leave the brain and reach the legs or the arms of an animal  -  -  about half a second  -  -  lets see if we can read these signals , extract the motor messages that are embedded in it , translate it into digital commands and send it to an artificial device that will reproduce the voluntary motor wheel of that brain in real time .
And see if we can measure how well we can translate that message when we compare to the way the body does that .
And if we can actually provide feedback , sensory signals that go back from this robotic , mechanical , computational actuator that is now under the control of the brain , back to the brain , how the brain deals with that , of receiving messages from an artificial piece of machinery .
And thats exactly what we did 10 years ago .
We started with a superstar monkey called Aurora that became one of the superstars of this field .
And Aurora liked to play video games .
As you can see here , she likes to use a joystick , like any one of us , any of our kids , to play this game .
And as a good primate , she even tries to cheat before she gets the right answer .
So even before a target appears that shes supposed to cross with the cursor that shes controlling with this joystick , Aurora is trying to find the target , no matter where it is .
And if shes doing that , because every time she crosses that target with the little cursor , she gets a drop of Brazilian orange juice .
And I can tell you , any monkey will do anything for you if you get a little drop of Brazilian orange juice .
Actually any primate will do that .
Think about that .
Well , while Aurora was playing this game , as you saw , and doing a thousand trials a day and getting 97 percent correct and 350 milliliters of orange juice , we are recording the brainstorms that are produced in her head and sending them to a robotic arm that was learning to reproduce the movements that Aurora was making .
Because the idea was to actually turn on this brain - machine interface and have Aurora play the game just by thinking , without interference of her body .
Her brainstorms would control an arm that would move the cursor and cross the target .
And to our shock , thats exactly what Aurora did .
She played the game without moving her body .
So every trajectory that you see of the cursor now , this is the exact first moment she got that .
Thats the exact first moment a brain intention was liberated from the physical domains of a body of a primate and could act outside , in that outside world , just by controlling an artificial device .
And Aurora kept playing the game , kept finding the little target and getting the orange juice that she wanted to get , that she craved for .
Well , she did that because she , at that time , had acquired a new arm .
The robotic arm that you see moving here 30 days later , after the first video that I showed to you , is under the control of Auroras brain and is moving the cursor to get to the target .
And Aurora now knows that she can play the game with this robotic arm , but she has not lost the ability to use her biological arms to do what she pleases .
She can scratch her back , she can scratch one of us , she can play another game .
By all purposes and means , Auroras brain has incorporated that artificial device as an extension of her body .
The model of the self that Aurora had in her mind has been expanded to get one more arm .
Well , we did that 10 years ago .
Just fast forward 10 years .
Just last year we realized that you dont even need to have a robotic device .
You can just build a computational body , an avatar , a monkey avatar .
And you can actually use it for our monkeys to either interact with them , or you can train them to assume in a virtual world the first - person perspective of that avatar and use her brain activity to control the movements of the avatars arms or legs .
And what we did basically was to train the animals to learn how to control these avatars and explore objects that appear in the virtual world .
And these objects are visually identical , but when the avatar crosses the surface of these objects , they send an electrical message that is proportional to the microtactile texture of the object that goes back directly to the monkeys brain , informing the brain what it is the avatar is touching .
And in just four weeks , the brain learns to process this new sensation and acquires a new sensory pathway  -  -  like a new sense .
And you truly liberate the brain now because you are allowing the brain to send motor commands to move this avatar .
And the feedback that comes from the avatar is being processed directly by the brain without the interference of the skin .
So what you see here is this is the design of the task .
Youre going to see an animal basically touching these three targets .
And he has to select one because only one carries the reward , the orange juice that they want to get .
And he has to select it by touch using a virtual arm , an arm that doesnt exist .
And thats exactly what they do .
This is a complete liberation of the brain from the physical constraints of the body and the motor in a perceptual task .
The animal is controlling the avatar to touch the targets .
And hes sensing the texture by receiving an electrical message directly in the brain .
And the brain is deciding what is the texture associated with the reward .
The legends that you see in the movie dont appear for the monkey .
And by the way , they dont read English anyway , so they are here just for you to know that the correct target is shifting position .
And yet , they can find them by tactile discrimination , and they can press it and select it .
So when we look at the brains of these animals , on the top panel you see the alignment of 125 cells showing what happens with the brain activity , the electrical storms , of this sample of neurons in the brain when the animal is using a joystick .
And thats a picture that every neurophysiologist knows .
The basic alignment shows that these cells are coding for all possible directions .
The bottom picture is what happens when the body stops moving and the animal starts controlling either a robotic device or a computational avatar .
As fast as we can reset our computers , the brain activity shifts to start representing this new tool , as if this too was a part of that primates body .
The brain is assimilating that too , as fast as we can measure .
So that suggests to us that our sense of self does not end at the last layer of the epithelium of our bodies , but it ends at the last layer of electrons of the tools that were commanding with our brains .
Our violins , our cars , our bicycles , our soccer balls , our clothing  -  -  they all become assimilated by this voracious , amazing , dynamic system called the brain .
How far can we take it ?
Well , in an experiment that we ran a few years ago , we took this to the limit .
We had an animal running on a treadmill at Duke University on the East Coast of the United States , producing the brainstorms necessary to move .
And we had a robotic device , a humanoid robot , in Kyoto , Japan at ATR Laboratories that was dreaming its entire life to be controlled by a brain , a human brain , or a primate brain .
What happens here is that the brain activity that generated the movements in the monkey was transmitted to Japan and made this robot walk while footage of this walking was sent back to Duke , so that the monkey could see the legs of this robot walking in front of her .
So she could be rewarded , not by what her body was doing but for every correct step of the robot on the other side of the planet controlled by her brain activity .
Funny thing , that round trip around the globe took 20 milliseconds less than it takes for that brainstorm to leave its head , the head of the monkey , and reach its own muscle .
The monkey was moving a robot that was six times bigger , across the planet .
This is one of the experiments in which that robot was able to walk autonomously .
This is CB1 fulfilling its dream in Japan under the control of the brain activity of a primate .
So where are we taking all this ?
What are we going to do with all this research , besides studying the properties of this dynamic universe that we have between our ears ?
Well the idea is to take all this knowledge and technology and try to restore one of the most severe neurological problems that we have in the world .
Millions of people have lost the ability to translate these brainstorms into action , into movement .
Although their brains continue to produce those storms and code for movements , they can not cross a barrier that was created by a lesion on the spinal cord .
So our idea is to create a bypass , is to use these brain - machine interfaces to read these signals , larger - scale brainstorms that contain the desire to move again , bypass the lesion using computational microengineering and send it to a new body , a whole body called an exoskeleton , a whole robotic suit that will become the new body of these patients .
And you can see an image produced by this consortium .
This is a nonprofit consortium called the Walk Again Project that is putting together scientists from Europe , together to work to actually get this new body built  -  -  a body that we believe , through the same plastic mechanisms that allow Aurora and other monkeys to use these tools through a brain - machine interface and that allows us to incorporate the tools that we produce and use in our daily life .
This same mechanism , we hope , will allow these patients , not only to imagine again the movements that they want to make and translate them into movements of this new body , but for this body to be assimilated as the new body that the brain controls .
So I was told about 10 years ago that this would never happen , that this was close to impossible .
And I can only tell you that as a scientist , I grew up in southern Brazil in the mid -  60s watching a few crazy guys telling  us  that they would go to the Moon .
And I was five years old , and I never understood why NASA didnt hire Captain Kirk and Spock to do the job ; after all , they were very proficient  -  -  but just seeing that as a kid made me believe , as my grandmother used to tell me , that  impossible is just the possible that someone has not put in enough effort to make it come true . 
So they told me that its impossible to make someone walk .
I think Im going to follow my grandmothers advice .
Thank you .
Lisa Margonelli : The political chemistry of oil
In the Gulf oil spills aftermath , Lisa Margonelli says drilling moratoriums and executive ousters make for good theater , but distract from the issue at its heart : our unrestrained oil consumption . She shares her bold plan to wean America off of oil  -  -  by confronting consumers with its real cost . 
So Im going to talk to you about you about the political chemistry of oil spills and why this is an incredibly important , long , oily , hot summer , and why we need to keep ourselves from getting distracted .
But before I talk about the political chemistry , I actually need to talk about the chemistry of oil .
This is a photograph from when I visited Prudhoe Bay in Alaska in 2002 to watch the Minerals Management Service testing their ability to burn oil spills in ice .
And what you see here is , you see a little bit of crude oil , you see some ice cubes , and you see two sandwich baggies of napalm .
The napalm is burning there quite nicely .
And the thing is , is that oil is really an abstraction for us as the American consumer .
Were four percent of the worlds population ; we use 25 percent of the worlds oil production .
And we dont really understand what oil is , until you check out its molecules , And you dont really understand that until you see this stuff burn .
So this is what happens as that burn gets going .
It takes off . Its a big woosh .
I highly recommend that you get a chance to see crude oil burn someday , because you will never need to hear another poli sci lecture on the geopolitics of oil again .
Itll just bake your retinas .
Let me tell you a little bit about this chemistry of oil .
Oil is a stew of hydrocarbon molecules .
It starts of with the very small ones , which are one carbon , four hydrogen  -  -  thats methane  -  -  it just floats off .
Then theres all sorts of intermediate ones with middle amounts of carbon .
Youve probably heard of benzene rings ; theyre very carcinogenic .
And it goes all the way over to these big , thick , galumphy ones that have hundreds of carbons , and they have thousands of hydrogens , and they have vanadium and heavy metals and sulfur and all kinds of craziness hanging off the sides of them .
Those are called the asphaltenes ; theyre an ingredient in asphalt .
Theyre very important in oil spills .
Let me tell you a little bit about the chemistry of oil in water .
It is this chemistry that makes oil so disastrous .
Oil doesnt sink , it floats .
If it sank , it would be a whole different story as far as an oil spill .
And the other thing it does is it spreads out the moment it hits the water .
It spreads out to be really thin , so you have a hard time corralling it .
The next thing that happens is the light ends evaporate , and some of the toxic things float into the water column and kill fish eggs and smaller fish and things like that , and shrimp .
And then the asphaltenes  -  -  and this is the crucial thing  -  -  the asphaltenes get whipped by the waves into a frothy emulsion , something like mayonnaise .
It triples the amount of oily , messy goo that you have in the water , and it makes it very hard to handle .
It also makes it very viscous .
When the Prestige sank off the coast of Spain , there were big , floating cushions the size of sofa cushions of emulsified oil , with the consistency , or the viscosity , of chewing gum .
Its incredibly hard to clean up .
And every single oil is different when it hits water .
When the chemistry of the oil and water also hits our politics , its absolutely explosive .
For the first time , American consumers will kind of see the oil supply chain in front of themselves .
They have a  eureka !  moment , when we suddenly understand oil in a different context .
So Im going to talk just a little bit about the origin of these politics , because its really crucial to understanding why this summer is so important , why we need to stay focused .
Nobody gets up in the morning and thinks ,  Wow ! Im going to go buy some three - carbon - to - 12 - carbon molecules to put in my tank and drive happily to work . 
No , they think ,  Ugh . I have to go buy gas .
Im so angry about it . The oil companies are ripping me off .
They set the prices , and I dont even know .
I am helpless over this . 
And this is what happens to us at the gas pump  -  -  and actually , gas pumps are specifically designed to diffuse that anger .
You might notice that many gas pumps , including this one , are designed to look like ATMs .
Ive talked to engineers . Thats specifically to diffuse our anger , because supposedly we feel good about ATMs .
That shows you how bad it is .
But actually , I mean , this feeling of helplessness comes in because most Americans actually feel that oil prices are the result of a conspiracy , not of the vicissitudes of the world oil market .
And the thing is , too , is that we also feel very helpless about the amount that we consume , which is somewhat reasonable , because in fact , we have designed this system where , if you want to get a job , its much more important to have a car that runs , to have a job and keep a job , than to have a GED .
And thats actually very perverse .
Now theres another perverse thing about the way we buy gas , which is that wed rather be doing anything else .
This is BPs gas station in downtown Los Angeles .
It is green . It is a shrine to greenishness .
 Now ,  you think ,  why would something so lame work on people so smart ? 
Well , the reason is , is because , when were buying gas , were very invested in this sort of cognitive dissonance .
I mean , were angry at the one hand and we want to be somewhere else .
We dont want to be buying oil ; we want to be doing something green .
And we get kind of in on our own con .
I mean  -  -  and this is funny , it looks funny here .
But in fact , thats why the slogan  beyond petroleum  worked .
But its an inherent part of our energy policy , which is we dont talk about reducing the amount of oil that we use .
We talk about energy independence . We talk about hydrogen cars .
We talk about biofuels that havent been invented yet .
And so , cognitive dissonance is part and parcel of the way that we deal with oil , and its really important to dealing with this oil spill .
Okay , so the politics of oil are very moral in the United States .
The oil industry is like a huge , gigantic octopus of engineering and finance and everything else , but we actually see it in very moral terms .
This is an early - on photograph  -  -  you can see , we had these gushers .
Early journalists looked at these spills , and they said ,  This is a filthy industry . 
But they also saw in it that people were getting rich for doing nothing .
They werent farmers , they were just getting rich for stuff coming out of the ground .
Its the  Beverly Hillbillies ,  basically .
But in the beginning , this was seen as a very morally problematic thing , long before it became funny .
And then , of course , there was John D. Rockefeller .
And the thing about John D. is that he went into this chaotic wild - east of oil industry , and he rationalized it into a vertically integrated company , a multinational .
It was terrifying ; you think Walmart is a terrifying business model now , imagine what this looked like in the 1860s or 1870s .
And it also the kind of root of how we see oil as a conspiracy .
But whats really amazing is that Ida Tarbell , the journalist , went in and did a big exposé of Rockefeller and actually got the whole antitrust laws put in place .
But in many ways , that image of the conspiracy still sticks with us .
And heres one of the things that Ida Tarbell said  -  -  she said ,  He has a thin nose like a thorn .
There were no lips .
There were puffs under the little colorless eyes with creases running from them . 
Okay , so that guy is actually still with us .
I mean , this is a very pervasive  -  -  this is part of our DNA .
And then theres this guy , okay .
So , you might be wondering why it is that , every time we have high oil prices or an oil spill , we call these CEOs down to Washington , and we sort of pepper them with questions in public and we try to shame them .
And this is something that weve been doing since 1974 , when we first asked them ,  Why are there these obscene profits ? 
And weve sort of personalized the whole oil industry into these CEOs .
And we take it as , you know  -  -  we look at it on a moral level , rather than looking at it on a legal and financial level .
And so Im not saying these guys arent liable to answer questions  -  -  Im just saying that , when you focus on whether they are or are not a bunch of greedy bastards , you dont actually get around to the point of making laws that are either going to either change the way they operate , or youre going to get around and reducing our dependence on oil .
So Im saying this is kind of a distraction .
But it makes for good theater , and its powerfully cathartic as you probably saw last week .
So the thing about water oil spills is that they are very politically galvanizing .
I mean , these pictures  -  -  this is from the Santa Barbara spill .
You have these pictures of birds .
They really influence people .
When the Santa Barbara spill happened in 1969 , it formed the environmental movement in its modern form .
It started Earth Day .
It also put in place the National Environmental Policy Act , the Clean Air Act , the Clean Water Act .
Everything that we are really stemmed from this period .
I think its important to kind of look at these pictures of the birds and understand what happens to us .
Here we are normally ; were standing at the gas pump , and were feeling kind of helpless .
We look at these pictures and we understand , for the first time , our role in this supply chain .
We connect the dots in the supply chain .
And we have this kind of  -  -  as voters , we have kind of a  eureka !  moment .
This is why these moments of these oil spills are so important .
But its also really important that we dont get distracted by the theater or the morals of it .
We actually need to go in and work on the roots of the problem .
One of the things that happened with the two previous oil spills was that we really worked on some of the symptoms .
We were very reactive , as opposed to being proactive about what happened .
And so what we did was , actually , we made moratoriums on the east and west coasts on drilling .
We stopped drilling in ANWR , but we didnt actually reduce the amount of oil that we consumed .
In fact , its continued to increase .
The only thing that really reduces the amount of oil that we consume is much higher prices .
As you can see , our own production has fallen off as our reservoirs have gotten old and expensive to drill out .
We only have two percent of the worlds oil reserves ; 65 percent of them are in the Persian Gulf .
One of the things thats happened because of this is that , since 1969 , the country of Nigeria , or the part of Nigeria that pumps oil , which is the delta  -  -  which is two times the size of Maryland  -  -  has had thousands of oil spills a year .
I mean , weve essentially been exporting oil spills when we import oil from places without tight environmental regulations .
That has been the equivalent of an Exxon Valdez spill every year since 1969 .
And we can wrap our heads around the spills , because thats what we see here , but in fact , these guys actually live in a war zone .
Theres a thousand battle - related deaths a year in this area twice the size of Maryland , and its all related to the oil .
And these guys , I mean , if they were in the U.S . , they might be actually here in this room .
They have degrees in political science , degrees in business  -  -  theyre entrepreneurs . They dont actually want to be doing what theyre doing .
And its sort of one of the other groups of people who pay a price for us .
The other thing that weve done , as weve continued to increase demand , is that we kind of play a shell game with the costs .
One of the places we put in a big oil project in Chad , with Exxon .
So the U.S . taxpayer paid for it ; the World Bank , Exxon paid for it .
We put it in . There was a tremendous banditry problem .
I was there in 2003 .
We were driving along this dark , dark road , and the guy in the green stepped out , and I was just like ,  Ahhh ! This is it . 
And then the guy in the Exxon uniform stepped out , and we realized it was okay .
They have their own private sort of army around them at the oil fields .
But at the same time , Chad has become much more unstable , and we are not paying for that price at the pump .
We pay for it in our taxes on April 15th .
We do the same thing with the price of policing the Persian Gulf and keeping the shipping lanes open .
This is 1988  -  -  we actually bombed two Iranian oil platforms that year .
That was the beginning of an escalating U.S . involvement there that we do not pay for at the pump .
We pay for it on April 15th , and we cant even calculate the cost of this involvement .
The other place that is sort of supporting our dependence on oil and our increased consumption is the Gulf of Mexico , which was not part of the moratoriums .
Now whats happened in the Gulf of Mexico  -  -  as you can see , this is the Minerals Management diagram of wells for gas and oil .
Its become this intense industrialized zone .
It doesnt have the same resonance for us that the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge has , but it should , I mean , its a bird sanctuary .
Also , every time you buy gasoline in the United States , half of it is actually being refined along the coast , because the Gulf actually has about 50 percent of our refining capacity and a lot of our marine terminals as well .
So the people of the Gulf have essentially been subsidizing the rest of us through a less - clean environment .
And finally , American families also pay a price for oil .
Now on the one hand , the price at the pump is not really very high when you consider the actual cost of the oil , but on the other hand , the fact that people have no other transit options means that they pay a large amount of their income into just getting back and forth to work , generally in a fairly crummy car .
If you look at people who make $ 50,000 a year , they have two kids , they might have three jobs or more , and then they have to really commute .
Theyre actually spending more on their car and fuel than they are on taxes or on health care .
And the same thing happens at the 50th percentile , around 80,000 .
Gasoline costs are a tremendous drain on the American economy , but theyre also a drain on individual families and its kind of terrifying to think about what happens when prices get higher .
So , what Im going to talk to you about now is : what do we have to do this time ?
What are the laws ? What do we have to do to keep ourselves focused ?
One thing is  -  -  we need to stay away from the theater .
We need to stay away from the moratoriums .
We need to focus really back again on the molecules .
The moratoriums are fine , but we do need to focus on the molecules on the oil .
One of the things that we also need to do , into thinking that you can have a green world , before you reduce the amount of oil that we use .
We need to focus on reducing the oil .
What you see in this top drawing is a schematic of how petroleum gets used in the U.S . economy .
It comes in on the side  -  -  the useful stuff is the dark gray , and the un - useful stuff , which is called the rejected energy  -  -  the waste , goes up to the top .
Now you can see that the waste far outweighs the actually useful amount .
And one of the things that we need to do is , not only fix the fuel efficiency of our vehicles and make them much more efficient , but we also need to fix the economy in general .
We need to remove the perverse incentives to use more fuel .
For example , we have an insurance system where the person who drives 20,000 miles a year pays the same insurance as somebody who drives 3,000 .
We actually encourage people to drive more .
We have policies that reward sprawl  -  -  we have all kinds of policies .
We need to have more mobility choices .
We need to make the gas price better reflect the real cost of oil .
And we need to shift subsidies from the oil industry , which is at least 10 billion dollars a year , into something that allows middle - class people to find better ways to commute .
Whether thats getting a much more efficient car and also kind of building markets for new cars and new fuels down the road , this is where we need to be .
We need to kind of rationalize this whole thing , and you can find more about this policy .
Its called STRONG , which is  Secure Transportation Reducing Oil Needs Gradually ,  and the idea is instead of being helpless , we need to be more strong .
Theyre up at NewAmerica . net .
Whats important about these is that we try to move from feeling helpless at the pump , to actually being active and to really sort of thinking about who we are , having kind of that special moment , where we connect the dots actually at the pump .
Now supposedly , oil taxes are the third rail of American politics  -  -  the no - fly zone .
I actually  -  -  I agree that a dollar a gallon on oil is probably too much , but I think that if we started this year with three cents a gallon on gasoline , and upped it to six cents next year , nine cents the following year , all the way up to 30 cents by 2020 , that we could actually significantly reduce our gasoline consumption , and at the same time we would give people time to prepare , time to respond , and we would be raising money and raising consciousness at the same time .
Let me give you a little sense of how this would work .
This is a gas receipt , hypothetically , for a year from now .
The first thing that you have on the tax is  -  -  you have a tax for a stronger America  -  -  33 cents .
So youre not helpless at the pump .
And the second thing that you have is a kind of warning sign , very similar to what you would find on a cigarette pack .
And what it says is ,  The National Academy of Sciences estimates that every gallon of gas you burn in your car creates 29 cents in health care costs . 
Thats a lot .
And so this  -  -  you can see that youre paying considerably less than the health care costs on the tax .
And also , the hope is that you start to be connected to the whole greater system .
And at the same time , you have a number that you can call to get more information on commuting , or a low - interest loan on a different kind of car , or whatever it is youre going to need to actually reduce your gasoline dependence .
With this whole sort of suite of policies , we could actually reduce our gasoline consumption  -  -  or our oil consumption  -  -  by 20 percent by 2020 .
So , three million barrels a day .
But in order to do this , one of the things we really need to do , is we need to remember we are people of the hydrocarbon .
We need to keep or minds on the molecules and not get distracted by the theater , not get distracted by the cognitive dissonance of the green possibilities that are out there .
We need to kind of get down and do the gritty work of reducing our dependence upon this fuel and these molecules .
Thank you .
Ludwick Marishane : A bath without water
If you had to walk a mile for a jug of water every day , as millions of people do , its unlikely youd use that precious water to bathe . Young entrepreneur Ludwick Marishane tells the amazing , funny story of how he invented a cheap , clean and convenient solution : DryBath , the worlds first bath - substituting lotion .
So I grew up in Limpopo , on the border of Limpopo and Mpumalanga , a little town called Motetema .
Water and electricity supply are as unpredictable as the weather , and growing up in these tough situations , at the age of 17 , I was relaxing with a couple of friends of mine in winter , and we were sunbathing .
The Limpopo sun gets really hot in winter .
So as we were sunbathing , my best friend next to me says ,  Man , why doesnt somebody invent something that you can just put on your skin and then you dont have to bathe ? 
And I sat , and I was like ,  Man , I would buy that , eh ? 
So I went home , and I did a little research , and I found some very shocking statistics .
Over 2.5 billion people in the world today do not have proper access to water and sanitation .
Four hundred and fifty million of them are in Africa , and five million of them are in South Africa .
Various diseases thrive in this environment , the most drastic of which is called trachoma .
Trachoma is an infection of the eye due to dirt getting into your eye . Multiple infections of trachoma can leave you permanently blind .
The disease leaves eight million people permanently blind each and every year . The shocking part about it is that to avoid being infected with trachoma , all you have to do is wash your face : no medicine , no pills , no injections .
So after seeing these shocking statistics , I thought to myself ,  Okay , even if Im not just doing it for myself and the fact that I dont want to bathe , I at least need to do it to try to save the world . 
So with my trusty little steed , my Nokia 6234 cell phone  -  -  I didnt have a laptop , I didnt have Internet much , except for the 20 - rand - an - hour Internet cafe — I did research on Wikipedia , on Google , about lotions , creams , the compositions , the melting points , the toxicities  -  -  I did high school science  -  -  and I wrote down a little formula on a piece of paper , and it looked like the KFC special spice , you know ?
So I was like , okay , so weve got the formula ready .
Now we need to get this thing into practice .
Fast forward four years later , after having written a 40 - page business plan on the cell phone , having written my patent on the cell phone , Im the youngest patent - holder in the country , and — — I cant say any more than that .
I had invented DryBath , the worlds first bath - substituting lotion .
You literally put it on your skin , and you dont have to bathe .
So after having tried to make it work in high school with the limited resources I had , I went to university , met a few people , got it into practice , and we have a fully functioning product thats ready to go to the market . Its actually available on the market .
So we learned a few lessons in commercializing and making DryBath available .
One of the things we learned was that poor communities dont buy products in bulk .
They buy products on demand . A person in Alex doesnt buy a box of cigarettes . They buy one cigarette each day , even though its more expensive .
So we packaged DryBath in these innovative little sachets .
You just snap them in half , and you squeeze it out .
And the cool part is , one sachet substitutes one bath for five rand .
After creating that model , we also learned a lot in terms of implementing the product .
We realized that even rich kids from the suburbs really want DryBath .
At least once a week .
Anyway , we realized that we could save 80 million liters of water on average each time they skipped a bath , and also we would save two hours a day for kids who are in rural areas , two hours more for school , two hours more for homework , two hours more to just be a kid .
After seeing that global impact , we narrowed it down to our key value proposition , which was cleanliness and convenience .
DryBath is a rich mans convenience and a poor mans lifesaver .
Having put the product into practice , we are actually now on the verge of selling the product onto a multinational to take it to the retail market , and one question I have for the audience today is , on the gravel roads of Limpopo , with an allowance of 50 rand a week , I came up with a way for the world not to bathe .
Whats stopping you ?
Im not done yet . Im not done yet .
And another key thing that I learned a lot throughout this whole process , last year Google named me as one of the brightest young minds in the world .
Im also currently the best student entrepreneur in the world , the first African to get that accolade , and one thing that really puzzles me is , I did all of this just because I didnt want to bathe . Thank you .
David Steindl - Rast : Want to be happy ? Be grateful
The one thing all humans have in common is that each of us wants to be happy , says Brother David Steindl - Rast , a monk and interfaith scholar . And happiness , he suggests , is born from gratitude . An inspiring lesson in slowing down , looking where youre going , and above all , being grateful .
There is something you know about me , something very personal , and there is something I know about every one of you and thats very central to your concerns .
There is something that we know about everyone we meet anywhere in the world , on the street , that is the very mainspring of whatever they do and whatever they put up with , and that is that all of us want to be happy .
In this , we are all together .
How we imagine our happiness , that differs from one another , but its already a lot that we have all in common , that we want to be happy .
Now my topic is gratefulness .
How is the connection between happiness and gratefulness ?
Many people would say , well , thats very easy .
When you are happy , you are grateful .
But think again .
Is it really the happy people that are grateful ?
We all know quite a number of people who have everything that it would take to be happy , and they are not happy , because they want something else or they want more of the same .
And we all know people who have lots of misfortune , misfortune that we ourselves would not want to have , and they are deeply happy .
They radiate happiness . You are surprised .
Why ? Because they are grateful .
So it is not happiness that makes us grateful .
Its gratefulness that makes us happy .
If you think its happiness that makes you grateful , think again .
Its gratefulness that makes you happy .
Now , we can ask , what really do we mean by gratefulness ?
And how does it work ?
I appeal to your own experience .
We all know from experience how it goes .
We experience something thats valuable to us .
Something is given to us thats valuable to us .
And its really given .
These two things have to come together .
It has to be something valuable , and its a real gift .
You havent bought it . You havent earned it .
You havent traded it in . You havent worked for it .
Its just given to you .
And when these two things come together , something thats really valuable to me and I realize its freely given , then gratefulness spontaneously rises in my heart , happiness spontaneously rises in my heart .
Thats how gratefulness happens .
Now the key to all this is that we can not only experience this once in a while .
We can not only have grateful experiences .
We can be people who live gratefully .
Grateful living , that is the thing .
And how can we live gratefully ?
By experiencing , by becoming aware that every moment is a given moment , as we say .
Its a gift . You havent earned it .
You havent brought it about in any way .
You have no way of assuring that there will be another moment given to you , and yet , thats the most valuable thing that can ever be given to us , this moment , with all the opportunity that it contains .
If we didnt have this present moment , we wouldnt have any opportunity to do anything or experience anything , and this moment is a gift .
Its a given moment , as we say .
Now , we say the gift within this gift is really the opportunity .
What you are really grateful for is the opportunity , not the thing that is given to you , because if that thing were somewhere else and you didnt have the opportunity to enjoy it , to do something with it , you wouldnt be grateful for it .
Opportunity is the gift within every gift , and we have this saying , opportunity knocks only once .
Well , think again .
Every moment is a new gift , over and over again , and if you miss the opportunity of this moment , another moment is given to us , and another moment .
We can avail ourselves of this opportunity , or we can miss it , and if we avail ourselves of the opportunity , it is the key to happiness .
Behold the master key to our happiness in our own hands .
Moment by moment , we can be grateful for this gift .
Does that mean that we can be grateful for everything ?
Certainly not .
We can not be grateful for violence , for war , for oppression , for exploitation .
On the personal level , we can not be grateful for the loss of a friend , for unfaithfulness , for bereavement .
But I didnt say we can be grateful for everything .
I said we can be grateful in every given moment for the opportunity , and even when we are confronted with something that is terribly difficult , we can rise to this occasion and respond to the opportunity that is given to us .
It isnt as bad as it might seem .
Actually , when you look at it and experience it , you find that most of the time , what is given to us is opportunity to enjoy , and we only miss it because we are rushing through life and we are not stopping to see the opportunity .
But once in a while , something very difficult is given to us , and when this difficult thing occurs to us , its a challenge to rise to that opportunity , and we can rise to it by learning something which is sometimes painful .
Learning patience , for instance .
We have been told that the road to peace is not a sprint , but is more like a marathon .
That takes patience . Thats difficult .
It may be to stand up for your opinion , to stand up for your conviction .
Thats an opportunity that is given to us .
To learn , to suffer , to stand up , all these opportunities are given to us , but they are opportunities , and those who avail themselves of those opportunities are the ones that we admire .
They make something out of life .
And those who fail get another opportunity .
We always get another opportunity .
Thats the wonderful richness of life .
So how can we find a method that will harness this ?
How can each one of us find a method for living gratefully , not just once in a while being grateful , but moment by moment to be grateful .
How can we do it ?
Its a very simple method .
Its so simple that its actually what we were told as children when we learned to cross the street .
Stop . Look . Go .
Thats all .
But how often do we stop ?
We rush through life . We dont stop .
We miss the opportunity because we dont stop .
We have to stop . We have to get quiet .
And we have to build stop signs into our lives .
When I was in Africa some years ago and then came back , I noticed water .
In Africa where I was , I didnt have drinkable water .
Every time I turned on the faucet , I was overwhelmed .
Every time I clicked on the light , I was so grateful . It made me so happy .
But after a while , this wears off .
So I put little stickers on the light switch and on the water faucet , and every time I turned it on , water .
So leave it up to your own imagination .
You can find whatever works best for you , but you need stop signs in your life .
And when you stop , then the next thing is to look .
You look . You open your eyes .
You open your ears . You open your nose .
You open all your senses for this wonderful richness that is given to us .
There is no end to it , and that is what life is all about , to enjoy , to enjoy what is given to us .
And then we can also open our hearts , our hearts for the opportunities , for the opportunities also to help others , to make others happy , because nothing makes us more happy than when all of us are happy .
And when we open our hearts to the opportunities , the opportunities invite us to do something , and that is the third .
Stop , look , and then go , and really do something .
And what we can do is whatever life offers to you in that present moment .
Mostly its the opportunity to enjoy , but sometimes its something more difficult .
But whatever it is , if we take this opportunity , we go with it , we are creative , those are the creative people , and that little stop , look , go , is such a potent seed that it can revolutionize our world .
Because we need , we are at the present moment in the middle of a change of consciousness , and you will be surprised if you  -  -  I am always surprised when I hear how many times this word  gratefulness  and  gratitude  comes up .
Everywhere you find it , a grateful airline , a restaurant gratefulness , a cafe gratefulness , a wine that is gratefulness .
Yes , I have even come across a toilet paper that the brand is called Thank You .
There is a wave of gratefulness because people are becoming aware how important this is and how this can change our world .
It can change our world in immensely important ways , because if youre grateful , youre not fearful , and if youre not fearful , youre not violent .
If youre grateful , you act out of a sense of enough and not of a sense of scarcity , and you are willing to share .
If you are grateful , you are enjoying the differences between people , and you are respectful to everybody , and that changes this power pyramid under which we live .
And it doesnt make for equality , but it makes for equal respect , and that is the important thing .
The future of the world will be a network , not a pyramid , not a pyramid turned upside down .
The revolution of which I am speaking is a nonviolent revolution , and its so revolutionary that it even revolutionizes the very concept of a revolution , because a normal revolution is one where the power pyramid is turned upside down and those who were on the bottom are now on the top and are doing exactly the same thing that the ones did before .
What we need is a networking of smaller groups , smaller and smaller groups who know one another , who interact with one another , and that is a grateful world .
A grateful world is a world of joyful people .
Grateful people are joyful people , and joyful people , the more and more joyful people there are , the more and more well have a joyful world .
We have a network for grateful living , and it has mushroomed .
We couldnt understand why it mushroomed .
We have an opportunity for people to light a candle when they are grateful for something .
And there have been 15 million candles lit in one decade .
People are becoming aware that a grateful world is a happy world , and we all have the opportunity by the simple stop , look , go , to transform the world , to make it a happy place .
And that is what I hope for us , and if this has contributed a little to making you want to do the same , stop , look , go .
Thank you .
Julian Treasure : Shh ! Sound health in 8 steps
Julian Treasure says our increasingly noisy world is gnawing away at our mental health  -  -  even costing lives . He lays out an 8 - step plan to soften this sonic assault and restore our relationship with sound .
The Hindus say ,  Nada brahma ,  one translation of which is ,  The world is sound . 
And in a way , thats true , because everything is vibrating .
In fact , all of you as you sit here right now are vibrating .
Every part of your body is vibrating at different frequencies .
So you are , in fact , a chord  -  -  each of you an individual chord .
One definition of health may be that that chord is in complete harmony .
Your ears cant hear that chord ; Incidentally , we see just one octave .
Your ears are always on  -  -  you have no ear lids .
They work even when you sleep .
The smallest sound you can perceive moves your eardrum just four atomic diameters .
The loudest sound you can hear is a trillion times more powerful than that .
Ears are made not for hearing , but for listening .
Listening is an active skill , whereas hearing is passive , listening is something that we have to work at  -  -  its a relationship with sound .
And yet its a skill that none of us are taught .
For example , have you ever considered that there are listening positions , places you can listen from ?
Here are two of them .
Reductive listening is listening  for . 
It reduces everything down to whats relevant and it discards everything thats not relevant .
Men typically listen reductively .
So hes saying ,  Ive got this problem . 
Hes saying ,  Heres your solution . Thanks very much . Next . 
Thats the way we talk , right guys ?
Expansive listening , on the other hand , is listening  with ,  not listening  for . 
Its got no destination in mind  -  -  its just enjoying the journey .
Women typically listen expansively .
If you look at these two , eye contact , facing each other , possibly both talking at the same time .
Men , if you get nothing else out of this talk , practice expansive listening , and you can transform your relationships .
The trouble with listening is that so much of what we hear is noise , surrounding us all the time .
Noise like this , according to the European Union , is reducing the health and the quality of life of 25 percent of the population of Europe .
Two percent of the population of Europe  -  -  thats 16 million people  -  -  are having their sleep devastated by noise like that .
Noise kills 200,000 people a year in Europe .
Its a really big problem .
Now , when you were little , if you had noise and you didnt want to hear it , youd stick your fingers in your ears and hum .
These days , you can do a similar thing , it just looks a bit cooler .
It looks a bit like this .
The trouble with widespread headphone use is it brings three really big health issues .
The first really big health issue is a word that Murray Schafer coined :  schizophonia . 
Its a dislocation between what you see and what you hear .
So , were inviting into our lives the voices of people who are not present with us .
I think theres something deeply unhealthy about living all the time in schizophonia .
The second problem that comes with headphone abuse is compression .
We squash music to fit it into our pocket and there is a cost attached to this .
Listen to this  -  -  this is an uncompressed piece of music .
And now the same piece of music with 98 percent of the data removed .
I do hope that some of you at least can hear the difference between those two .
There is a cost of compression .
It makes you tired and irritable to have to make up all of that data .
Youre having to imagine it .
Its not good for you in the long run .
The third problem with headphones is this : deafness  -  -  noise - induced hearing disorder .
Ten million Americans already have this for one reason or another , but really worryingly , 16 percent  -  -  roughly one in six  -  -  of American teenagers suffer from noise - induced hearing disorder as a result of headphone abuse .
One study at an American university found that 61 percent of college freshmen had damaged hearing as a result of headphone abuse .
We may be raising an entire generation of deaf people .
Now thats a really serious problem .
Ill give you three quick tips to protect your ears and pass these on to your children , please .
Professional hearing protectors are great ; I use some all the time .
If youre going to use headphones , buy the best ones you can afford because quality means you dont have to have it so loud .
If you cant hear somebody talking to you in a loud voice , its too loud .
And thirdly , if youre in bad sound , its fine to put your fingers in your ears or just move away from it .
Protect your ears in that way .
Lets move away from bad sound and look at some friends that I urge you to seek out .
WWB : Wind , water , birds  -  -  stochastic natural sounds composed of lots of individual random events , all of it very healthy , all of it sound that we evolved to over the years .
Seek those sounds out ; theyre good for you and so it this .
Silence is beautiful .
The Elizabethans described language as decorated silence .
I urge you to move away from silence with intention and to design soundscapes just like works of art .
Have a foreground , a background , all in beautiful proportion .
Its fun to get into designing with sound .
If you cant do it yourself , get a professional to do it for you .
Sound design is the future , and I think its the way were going to change the way the world sounds .
Im going to just run quickly through eight modalities , eight ways sound can improve health .
First , ultrasound : were very familiar with it from physical therapy ; its also now being used to treat cancer .
Lithotripsy  -  -  saving thousands of people a year from the scalpel by pulverizing stones with high - intensity sound .
Sound healing is a wonderful modality .
Its been around for thousands of years .
I do urge you to explore this .
There are great things being done there , treating now autism , dementia and other conditions .
And music , of course . Just listening to music is good for you , if its music thats made with good intention , made with love , generally .
Devotional music , good  -  -  Mozart , good .
There are all sorts of types of music that are very healthy .
And four modalities where you need to take some action and get involved .
First of all , listen consciously .
I hope that that after this talk youll be doing that .
Its a whole new dimension to your life and its wonderful to have that dimension .
Secondly , get in touch with making some sound  -  -  create sound .
The voice is the instrument we all play , and yet how many of us are trained in using our voice ? Get trained ; learn to sing , learn to play an instrument .
Musicians have bigger brains  -  -  its true .
You can do this in groups as well .
Its a fantastic antidote to schizophonia ; to make music and sound in a group of people , whichever style you enjoy particularly .
And lets take a stewarding role for the sound around us .
Protect your ears ? Yes , absolutely .
Design soundscapes to be beautiful around you at home and at work .
And lets start to speak up when people are assailing us with the noise that I played you early on .
So Im going to leave you with seven things you can do right now to improve your health with sound .
My vision is of a world that sounds beautiful and if we all start doing these things , we will take a very big step in that direction .
So I urge you to take that path .
Im leaving you with a little more birdsong , which is very good for you .
I wish you sound health .
Eben Bayer : Are mushrooms the new plastic ?
Product designer Eben Bayer reveals his recipe for a new , fungus - based packaging material that protects fragile stuff like furniture , plasma screens  -  -  and the environment .
So , Id like to spend a few minutes with you folks today imagining what our planet might look like in a thousand years .
But before I do that , I need to talk to you about synthetic materials like plastics , which require huge amounts of energy to create and , because of their disposal issues , are slowly poisoning our planet .
I also want to tell you and share with you how my team and I have been using mushrooms over the last three years .
Not like that .
Were using mushrooms to create an entirely new class of materials , which perform a lot like plastics during their use , but are made from crop waste and are totally compostable at the end of their lives .
But first , I need to talk to you about what I consider one of the most egregious offenders in the disposable plastics category .
This is a material you all know is Styrofoam , but I like to think of it as toxic white stuff .
In a single cubic foot of this material  -  -  about what would come around your computer or large television  -  -  you have the same energy content of about a liter and a half of petrol .
Yet , after just a few weeks of use , youll throw this material in the trash .
And this isnt just found in packaging .
20 billion dollars of this material is produced every year , in everything from building materials to surfboards to coffee cups to table tops .
And thats not the only place its found .
The EPA estimates , in the United States , by volume , this material occupies 25 percent of our landfills .
Even worse is when it finds its way into our natural environment  -  -  on the side of the road or next to a river .
If its not picked up by a human , like me and you , itll stay there for thousands and thousands of years .
Perhaps even worse is when it finds its way into our oceans , like in the great plastic gyre , where these materials are being mechanically broken into smaller and smaller bits , but theyre not really going away .
Theyre not biologically compatible .
Theyre basically fouling up Earths respiratory and circulatory systems .
And because these materials are so prolific , because theyre found in so many places , theres one other place youll find this material , styrene , which is made from benzene , a known carcinogen .
Youll find it inside of you .
So , for all these reasons , I think we need better materials , and there are three key principles we can use to guide these materials .
The first is feedstocks .
Today , we use a single feedstock , petroleum , to heat our homes , power our cars and make most of the materials you see around you .
We recognize this is a finite resource , and its simply crazy to do this , to put a liter and a half of petrol in the trash every time you get a package .
Second of all , we should really strive to use far less energy in creating these materials .
I say far less , because 10 percent isnt going to cut it .
We should be talking about half , a quarter , one - tenth the energy content .
And lastly , and I think perhaps most importantly , we should be creating materials that fit into what I call natures recycling system .
This recycling system has been in place for the last billion years .
I fit into it , you fit into it , and a hundred years tops , my body can return to the Earth with no preprocessing .
Yet that packaging I got in the mail yesterday is going to last for thousands of years .
This is crazy .
But nature provides us with a really good model here .
When a trees done using its leaves  -  -  its solar collectors , these amazing molecular photon capturing devices  -  -  at the end of a season , it doesnt pack them up , take them to the leaf reprocessing center and have them melted down to form new leaves .
It just drops them , the shortest distance possible , to the forest floor , where theyre actually upcycled into next years topsoil .
And this gets us back to the mushrooms .
Because in nature , mushrooms are the recycling system .
And what weve discovered is , by using a part of the mushroom youve probably never seen  -  -  analogous to its root structure ; its called mycelium  -  -  we can actually grow materials with many of the same properties of conventional synthetics .
Now , mycelium is an amazing material , because its a self - assembling material .
It actually takes things we would consider waste  -  -  things like seed husks or woody biomass  -  -  and can transform them into a chitinous polymer , which you can form into almost any shape .
In our process , we basically use it as a glue .
And by using mycelium as a glue , you can mold things just like you do in the plastic industry , and you can create materials with many different properties , materials that are insulating , fire - resistant , moisture - resistant , vapor - resistant  -  -  materials that can absorb impacts , that can absorb acoustical impacts .
But these materials are grown from agricultural byproducts , not petroleum .
And because theyre made of natural materials , they are 100 percent compostable in you own backyard .
So Id like to share with you the four basic steps required to make these materials .
The first is selecting a feedstock , preferably something thats regional , thats in your area , right  -  -  local manufacturing .
The next is actually taking this feedstock and putting in a tool , physically filling an enclosure , a mold , in whatever shape you want to get .
Then you actually grow the mycelium through these particles , and thats where the magic happens , because the organism is doing the work in this process , not the equipment .
The final step is , of course , the product , whether its a packaging material , a table top , or building block .
Our vision is local manufacturing , like the local food movement , for production .
So weve created formulations for all around the world using regional byproducts .
If youre in China , you might use a rice husk or a cottonseed hull .
If youre in Northern Europe or North America , you can use things like buckwheat husks or oat hulls .
We then process these husks with some basic equipment .
And I want to share with you a quick video from our facility that gives you a sense of how this looks at scale .
So what youre seeing here is actually cotton hulls from Texas , in this case .
Its a waste product .
And what theyre doing in our equipment is going through a continuous system , which cleans , cooks , cools and pasteurizes these materials , while also continuously inoculating them with our mycelium .
This gives us a continuous stream of material that we can put into almost any shape , though today were making corner blocks .
And its when this lid goes on the part , that the magic really starts .
Because the manufacturing process is our organism .
Itll actually begin to digest these wastes and , over the next five days , assemble them into biocomposites .
Our entire facility is comprised of thousands and thousands and thousands of these tools sitting indoors in the dark , quietly self - assembling materials  -  -  and everything from building materials to , in this case , a packaging corner block .
So Ive said a number of times that we grow materials .
And its kind of hard to picture how that happens .
So my team has taken five days - worth of growth , a typical growth cycle for us , and condensed it into a 15 - second time lapse .
And I want you to really watch closely these little white dots on the screen , because , over the five - day period , what they do is extend out and through this material , using the energy thats contained in these seed husks to build this chitinous polymer matrix .
This matrix self - assembles , growing through and around the particles , making millions and millions of tiny fibers .
And what parts of the seed husk we dont digest , actually become part of the final , physical composite .
So in front of your eyes , this part just self - assembled .
It actually takes a little longer . It takes five days .
But its much faster than conventional farming .
The last step , of course , is application .
In this case , weve grown a corner block .
A major Fortune 500 furniture maker uses these corner blocks to protect their tables in shipment .
They used to use a plastic packaging buffer , but we were able to give them the exact same physical performance with our grown material .
Best of all , when it gets to the customer , its not trash .
They can actually put this in their natural ecosystem without any processing , and its going to improve the local soil .
So , why mycelium ?
The first reason is local open feedstocks .
You want to be able to do this anywhere in the world and not worry about peak rice hull or peak cottonseed hulls , because you have multiple choices .
The next is self - assembly , because the organism is actually doing most of the work in this process .
You dont need a lot of equipment to set up a production facility .
So you can have lots of small facilities spread all across the world .
Biological yield is really important .
And because 100 percent of what we put in the tool become the final product , even the parts that arent digested become part of the structure , were getting incredible yield rates .
Natural polymers , well ... I think thats whats most important , because these polymers have been tried and tested in our ecosystem for the last billion years , in everything from mushrooms to crustaceans .
Theyre not going to clog up Earths ecosystems . They work great .
And while , today , we can practically guarantee that yesterdays packaging is going to be here in 10,000 years , what I want to guarantee is that in 10,000 years , our descendants , our childrens children , will be living happily and in harmony with a healthy Earth .
And I think that can be some really good news .
Thank you .
Nirmalya Kumar : Indias invisible innovation
Can India become a global hub for innovation ? Nirmalya Kumar thinks it already has . He details four types of  invisible innovation  currently coming out of India and explains why companies that used to just outsource manufacturing jobs are starting to move top management positions overseas , too . 
Over the last two decades , India has become a global hub for software development and offshoring of back office services , as we call it , and what we were interested in finding out was that because of this huge industry that has started over the last two decades in India , offshoring software development and back office services , theres been a flight of white collar jobs from the developed world to India .
When this is combined with the loss of manufacturing jobs to China , it has , you know , led to considerable angst amongst the Western populations .
In fact , if you look at polls , they show a declining trend for support for free trade in the West .
Now , the Western elites , however , have said this fear is misplaced .
For example , if you have read — I suspect many of you have done so — read the book by Thomas Friedman called  The World Is Flat ,  he said , basically , in his book that , you know , this fear for free trade is wrong because it assumes , its based on a mistaken assumption that everything that can be invented has been invented .
In fact , he says , its innovation that will keep the West ahead of the developing world , with the more sophisticated , innovative tasks being done in the developed world , and the less sophisticated , shall we say , drudge work being done in the developing world .
Now , what we were trying to understand was , is this true ?
Could India become a source , or a global hub , of innovation , just like its become a global hub for back office services and software development ?
And for the last four years , my coauthor Phanish Puranam and I spent investigating this topic .
Initially , or , you know , as people would say , you know , in fact the more aggressive people who are supporting the Western innovative model , say ,  Where are the Indian Googles , iPods and Viagras , if the Indians are so bloody smart ? 
So initially , when we started our research , we went and met several executives , and we asked them ,  What do you think ? Will India go from being a favored destination for software services and back office services to a destination for innovation ? 
They laughed . They dismissed us .
They said ,  You know what ? Indians dont do innovation . 
The more polite ones said ,  Well , you know , Indians make good software programmers and accountants , but they cant do the creative stuff . 
Sometimes , it took a more , took a veneer of sophistication , and people said ,  You know , its nothing to do with Indians .
Its really the rule - based , regimented education system in India that is responsible for killing all creativity . 
They said , instead , if you want to see real creativity , go to Silicon Valley , and look at companies like Google , Microsoft , Intel .
So we started examining the R and amp ; D and innovation labs of Silicon Valley .
Well , interestingly , what you find there is , usually you are introduced to the head of the innovation lab or the R and amp ; D center as they may call it , and more often than not , its an Indian .
So I immediately said ,  Well , but you could not have been educated in India , right ?
You must have gotten your education here . 
It turned out , in every single case , they came out of the Indian educational system .
So we realized that maybe we had the wrong question , and the right question is , really , can Indians based out of India do innovative work ?
So off we went to India . We made , I think , about a dozen trips to Bangalore , Mumbai , Gurgaon , Delhi , Hyderabad , you name it , to examine what is the level of corporate innovation in these cities .
And what we found was , as we progressed in our research , was , that we were asking really the wrong question .
When you ask ,  Where are the Indian Googles , iPods and Viagras ?  you are taking a particular perspective on innovation , which is innovation for end users , visible innovation .
Instead , innovation , if you remember , some of you may have read the famous economist Schumpeter , he said ,  Innovation is novelty in how value is created and distributed . 
It could be new products and services , but it could also be new ways of producing products .
It could also be novel ways of organizing firms and industries .
Once you take this , theres no reason to restrict innovation , the beneficiaries of innovation , just to end users .
When you take this broader conceptualization of innovation , what we found was , India is well represented in innovation , but the innovation that is being done in India is of a form we did not anticipate , and what we did was we called it  invisible innovation . 
And specifically , there are four types of invisible innovation that are coming out of India .
The first type of invisible innovation out of India is what we call innovation for business customers , which is led by the multinational corporations , which have  -  -  in the last two decades , there have been 750 R and amp ; D centers set up in India by multinational companies employing more than 400,000 professionals .
Now , when you consider the fact that , historically , the R and amp ; D center of a multinational company was always in the headquarters , or in the country of origin of that multinational company , to have 750 R and amp ; D centers of multinational corporations in India is truly a remarkable figure .
When we went and talked to the people in those innovation centers and asked them what are they working on , they said ,  We are working on global products . 
They were not working on localizing global products for India , which is the usual role of a local R and amp ; D.
They were working on truly global products , and companies like Microsoft , Google , AstraZeneca , General Electric , Philips , have already answered in the affirmative the question that from their Bangalore and Hyderabad R and amp ; D centers they are able to produce products and services for the world .
But of course , as an end user , you dont see that , because you only see the name of the company , not where it was developed .
The other thing we were told then was ,  Yes , but , you know , the kind of work that is coming out of the Indian R and amp ; D center can not be compared to the kind of work that is coming out of the U.S . R and amp ; D centers . 
So my coauthor Phanish Puranam , who happens to be one of the smartest people I know , said hes going to do a study .
What he did was he looked at those companies that had an R and amp ; D center in USA and in India , and then he looked at a patent that was filed out of the U.S . and a similar patent filed out of the same companys subsidiary in India , so hes now comparing the patents of R and amp ; D centers in the U.S . with R and amp ; D centers in India of the same company to find out what is the quality of the patents filed out of the Indian centers and how do they compare with the quality of the patents filed out of the U.S . centers ?
Interestingly , what he finds is — and by the way , the way we look at the quality of a patent is what we call forward citations : How many times does a future patent reference the older patent ? — he finds something very interesting .
What we find is that the data says that the number of forward citations of a patent filed out of a U.S . R and amp ; D subsidiary is identical to the number of forward citations of a patent filed by an Indian subsidiary of the same company within that company .
So within the company , theres no difference in the forward citation rates of their Indian subsidiaries versus their U.S . subsidiaries .
So thats the first kind of invisible innovation coming out of India .
The second kind of invisible innovation coming out of India is what we call outsourcing innovation to Indian companies , where many companies today are contracting Indian companies to do a major part of their product development work for their global products which are going to be sold to the entire world .
For example , in the pharma industry , a lot of the molecules are being developed , but you see a major part of that work is being sent to India .
For example , XCL Technologies , they developed two of the mission critical systems for the new Boeing 787 Dreamliner , one to avoid collisions in the sky , and another to allow landing in zero visibility .
But of course , when you climb onto the Boeing 787 , you are not going to know that this is invisible innovation out of India .
The third kind of invisible innovation coming out of India is what we call process innovations , because of an injection of intelligence by Indian firms .
Process innovation is different from product innovation .
Its about how do you create a new product or develop a new product or manufacture a new product , but not a new product itself ?
Only in India do millions of young people dream of working in a call center .
What happens — You know , its a dead end job in the West , what high school dropouts do .
What happens when you put hundreds of thousands of smart , young , ambitious kids on a call center job ?
Very quickly , they get bored , and they start innovating , and they start telling the boss how to do this job better , and out of this process innovation comes product innovations , which are then marketed around the world .
For example , 24 / 7 Customer , traditional call center company , used to be a traditional call center company . Today theyre developing analytical tools to do predictive modeling so that before you pick up the phone , you can guess or predict what this phone call is about .
Its because of an injection of intelligence into a process which was considered dead for a long time in the West .
And the last kind of innovation , invisible innovation coming out of India is what we call management innovation .
Its not a new product or a new process but a new way to organize work , and the most significant management innovation to come out of India , invented by the Indian offshoring industry is what we call the global delivery model .
What the global delivery model allows is , it allows you to take previously geographically core - located tasks , break them up into parts , send them around the world where the expertise and the cost structure exists , and then specify the means for reintegrating them .
Without that , you could not have any of the other invisible innovations today .
So , what Im trying to say is , what we are finding in our research is , that if products for end users is the visible tip of the innovation iceberg , India is well represented in the invisible , large , submerged portion of the innovation iceberg .
Now , this has , of course , some implications , and so we developed three implications of this research .
The first is what we called sinking skill ladder , and now Im going to go back to where I started my conversation with you , which was about the flight of jobs .
Now , of course , when we first , as a multinational company , decide to outsource jobs to India in the R and amp ; D , what we are going to do is we are going to outsource the bottom rung of the ladder to India , the least sophisticated jobs , just like Tom Friedman would predict .
Now , what happens is , when you outsource the bottom rung of the ladder to India for innovation and for R and amp ; D work , at some stage in the very near future you are going to have to confront a problem , which is where does the next step of the ladder people come from within your company ?
So you have two choices then : Either you bring the people from India into the developed world to take positions in the next step or you say , theres so many people in the bottom step of the ladder waiting to take the next position in India , why dont we move the next step to India ?
What we are trying to say is that once you outsource the bottom end of the ladder , you  -  -  its a self - perpetuating act , because of the sinking skill ladder , and the sinking skill ladder is simply the point that you cant be an investment banker without having been an analyst once .
You cant be a professor without having been a student .
You cant be a consultant without having been a research associate .
So , if you outsource the least sophisticated jobs , at some stage , the next step of the ladder has to follow .
The second thing we bring up is what we call the browning of the TMT , the top management teams .
If the R and amp ; D talent is going to be based out of India and China , and the largest growth markets are going to be based out of India and China , you have to confront the problem that your top management of the future is going to have to come out of India and China , because thats where the product leadership is , thats where the important market leadership is .
Right ? And the last thing we point out in this slide , which is , you know , that to this story , theres one caveat .
India has the youngest growing population in the world .
This demographic dividend is incredible , but paradoxically , theres also the mirage of mighty labor pools .
Indian institutes and educational system , with a few exceptions , are incapable of producing students in the quantity and quality needed to keep this innovation engine going , so companies are finding innovative ways to overcome this , but in the end it does not absolve the government of the responsibility for creating this educational structure .
So finally , I want to conclude by showing you the profile of one company , IBM .
As many of you know , IBM has always been considered for the last hundred years to be one of the most innovative companies .
In fact , if you look at the number of patents filed over history , I think they are in the top or the top two or three companies in the world of all patents filed in the USA as a private company .
Here is the profile of employees of IBM over the last decade .
In 2003 , they had 300,000 employees , or 330,000 employees , out of which , 135,000 were in America , 9,000 were in India .
In 2009 , they had 400,000 employees , by which time the U.S . employees had moved to 105,000 , whereas the Indian employees had gone to 100,000 .
Well , in 2010 , they decided theyre not going to reveal this data anymore , so I had to make some estimates based on various sources .
Here are my best guesses . Okay ? Im not saying this is the exact number , its my best guess .
It gives you a sense of the trend .
There are 433,000 people now at IBM , out of which 98,000 are remaining in the U.S . , and 150,000 are in India .
So you tell me , is IBM an American company , or an Indian company ?
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much .
Jody Williams : A realistic vision for world peace
Nobel Peace laureate Jody Williams brings tough love to the dream of world peace , with her razor - sharp take on what  peace  really means , and a set of profound stories that zero in on the creative struggle  -  -  and sacrifice  -  -  of those who work for it .
Im actually here to make a challenge to people .
I know there have been many challenges made to people .
The one Im going to make is that it is time for us to reclaim what peace really means .
Peace is not  Kumbaya , my Lord . 
Peace is not the dove and the rainbow  -  -  as lovely as they are .
When I see the symbols of the rainbow and the dove , I think of personal serenity .
I think of meditation .
I do not think about what I consider to be peace , which is sustainable peace with justice and equality .
It is a sustainable peace in which the majority of people on this planet have access to enough resources to live dignified lives , where these people have enough access to education and health care , so that they can live in freedom from want and freedom from fear .
This is called human security .
And I am not a complete pacifist like some of my really , really heavy - duty , non - violent friends , like Mairead McGuire .
I understand that humans are so  messed up   -  -  to use a nice word , because I promised my mom Id stop using the F - bomb in public .
And Im trying harder and harder .
Mom , Im really trying .
We need a little bit of police ; we need a little bit of military , but for defense .
We need to redefine what makes us secure in this world .
It is not arming our country to the teeth .
It is not getting other countries to arm themselves to the teeth with the weapons that we produce and we sell them .
It is using that money more rationally to make the countries of the world secure , to make the people of the world secure .
I was thinking about the recent ongoings in Congress , where the president is offering 8.4 billion dollars to try to get the START vote .
I certainly support the START vote .
But hes offering 84 billion dollars for the modernizing of nuclear weapons .
Do you know the figure that the U.N . talks about for fulfilling the Millennium Development Goals is 80 billion dollars ?
Just that little bit of money , which to me , I wish it was in my bank account  -  -  its not , but ...
In global terms , its a little bit of money .
But its going to modernize weapons we do not need and will not be gotten rid of in our lifetime , unless we get up off our ...
and take action to make it happen , unless we begin to believe that all of the things that weve been hearing about in these last two days are elements of what come together to make human security .
It is saving the tigers .
It is stopping the tar sands .
It is having access to medical equipment that can actually tell who does have cancer .
It is all of those things .
It is using our money for all of those things .
It is about action .
I was in Hiroshima a couple of weeks ago , and His Holiness  -  -  were sitting there in front of thousands of people in the city , and there were about eight of us Nobel laureates .
And hes a bad guy . Hes like a bad kid in church .
Were staring at everybody , waiting our turn to speak , and he leans over to me , and he says ,  Jody , Im a Buddhist monk . 
I said ,  Yes , Your Holiness .
Your robe gives it away . 
He said ,  You know that I kind of like meditation , and I pray . 
I said ,  Thats good . Thats good .
We need that in the world .
I dont follow that , but thats cool . 
And he says ,  But I have become skeptical .
I do not believe that meditation and prayer will change this world .
I think what we need is action . 
His Holiness , in his robes , is my new action hero .
I spoke with Aung Sun Suu Kyi a couple of days ago .
As most of you know , shes a hero for democracy in her country , Burma .
You probably also know that she has spent 15 of the last 20 years imprisoned for her efforts to bring about democracy .
She was just released a couple of weeks ago , and were very concerned to see how long she will be free , because she is already out in the streets in Rangoon , agitating for change .
She is already out in the streets , working with the party to try to rebuild it .
But I talked to her for a range of issues .
But one thing that I want to say , because its similar to what His Holiness said .
She said ,  You know , we have a long road to go to finally get democracy in my country .
But I dont believe in hope without endeavor .
I dont believe in the hope of change , unless we take action to make it so . 
Heres another woman hero of mine .
Shes my friend , Dr . Shirin Ebadi , the first Muslim woman to receive the Nobel Peace Prize .
She has been in exile for the last year and a half .
You ask her where she lives  -  -  where does she live in exile ?
She says the airports of the world .
She is traveling because she was out of the country at the time of the elections .
And instead of going home , she conferred with all the other women that she works with , who said to her ,  Stay out . We need you out .
We need to be able to talk to you out there , so that you can give the message of whats happening here . 
A year and a half  -  -  shes out speaking on behalf of the other women in her country .
Wangari Maathai  -  -  2004 Peace laureate .
They call her the  Tree Lady ,  but shes more than the Tree Lady .
Working for peace is very creative .
Its hard work every day .
When she was planting those trees , I dont think most people understand that , at the same time , she was using the action of getting people together to plant those trees to talk about how to overcome the authoritarian government in her country .
People could not gather without getting busted and taken to jail .
But if they were together planting trees for the environment , it was okay  -  -  creativity .
But its not just iconic women like Shirin , like Aung Sun Suu Kyi , like Wangari Maathai  -  -  it is other women in the world who are also struggling together to change this world .
The Womens League of Burma , 11 individual organizations of Burmese women came together because theres strength in numbers .
Working together is what changes our world .
The Million Signatures Campaign of women inside Burma working together to change human rights , to bring democracy to that country .
When one is arrested and taken to prison , another one comes out and joins the movement , recognizing that if they work together , they will ultimately bring change in their own country .
Mairead McGuire in the middle , Betty Williams on the right - hand side  -  -  bringing peace to Northern Ireland .
Ill tell you the quick story .
An IRA driver was shot , and his car plowed into people on the side of the street .
There was a mother and three children .
The children were killed on the spot .
It was Maireads sister .
Instead of giving in to grief , depression , defeat in the face of that violence , Mairead hooked up with Betty  -  -  a staunch Protestant and a staunch Catholic  -  -  and they took to the streets to say ,  No more violence . 
And they were able to get tens of thousands of , primarily , women , some men , in the streets to bring about change .
And they have been part of what brought peace to Northern Ireland , and theyre still working on it , because theres still a lot more to do .
This is Rigoberta Menchu Tum .
She also received the Peace Prize .
She is now running for president .
She is educating the indigenous people of her country about what it means to be a democracy , about how you bring democracy to the country , about educating , about how to vote  -  -  but that democracy is not just about voting ; its about being an active citizen .
Thats what I got stuck doing  -  -  the landmine campaign .
One of the things that made this campaign work is because we grew from two NGOs to thousands in 90 countries around the world , working together in common cause to ban landmines .
Some of the people who worked in our campaign could only work maybe an hour a month .
They could maybe volunteer that much .
There were others , like myself , who were full - time .
But it was the actions , together , of all of us that brought about that change .
In my view , what we need today is people getting up and taking action to reclaim the meaning of peace .
Its not a dirty word .
Its hard work every single day .
And if each of us who cares about the different things we care about got up off our butts and volunteered as much time as we could , we would change this world , we would save this world .
And we cant wait for the other guy . We have to do it ourselves .
Thank you .
Toni Griffin : A new vision for rebuilding Detroit
Once the powerhouse of Americas industrial might , Detroit is more recently known in the popular imagination as a fabulous ruin , crumbling and bankrupt . But city planner Toni Griffin asks us to look again  -  -  and to imagine an entrepreneurial future for the citys 700,000 residents .
By 2010 , Detroit had become the poster child for an American city in crisis .
There was a housing collapse , an auto industry collapse , and the population had plummeted by 25 percent between 2000 and 2010 , and many people were beginning to write it off , as it had topped the list of American shrinking cities .
By 2010 , I had also been asked by the Kresge Foundation and the city of Detroit to join them in leading a citywide planning process for the city to create a shared vision for its future .
I come to this work as an architect and an urban planner , and Ive spent my career working in other contested cities , like Chicago , my hometown ; Harlem , which is my current home ; Washington , D.C . ; and Newark , New Jersey .
All of these cities , to me , still had a number of unresolved issues related to urban justice , issues of equity , inclusion and access .
Now by 2010 , as well , popular design magazines were also beginning to take a closer look at cities like Detroit , and devoting whole issues to  fixing the city . 
I was asked by a good friend , Fred Bernstein , to do an interview for the October issue of Architect magazine , and he and I kind of had a good chuckle when we saw the magazine released with the title ,  Can This Planner Save Detroit ? 
So Im smiling with a little bit of embarrassment right now , because obviously , its completely absurd that a single person , let alone a planner , could save a city .
But Im also smiling because I thought it represented a sense of hopefulness that our profession could play a role in helping the city to think about how it would recover from its severe crisis .
So Id like to spend a little bit of time this afternoon and tell you a little bit about our process for fixing the city , a little bit about Detroit , and I want to do that through the voices of Detroiters .
So we began our process in September of 2010 .
Its just after a special mayoral election , this citywide planning process , which brings a lot of anxiety and fears among Detroiters .
We had planned to hold a number of community meetings in rooms like this to introduce the planning process , and people came out from all over the city , including areas that were stable neighborhoods , as well as areas that were beginning to see a lot of vacancy .
And most of our audience was representative of the 82 percent African - American population in the city at that time .
So obviously , we have a Q and A portion of our program , and people line up to mics to ask questions .
Many of them step very firmly to the mic , put their hands across their chest , and go ,  I know you people are trying to move me out of my house , right ? 
So that question is really powerful , and it was certainly powerful to us in the moment , when you connect it to the stories that some Detroiters had , and actually a lot of African - Americans families have had that are living in Midwestern cities like Detroit .
Many of them told us the stories about how they came to own their home through their grandparents or great - grandparents , who were one of 1.6 million people who migrated from the rural South to the industrial North , as depicted in this painting by Jacob Lawrence ,  The Great Migration . 
They came to Detroit for a better way of life .
Many found work in the automobile industry , the Ford Motor Company , as depicted in this mural by Diego Rivera in the Detroit Institute of Art .
The fruits of their labors would afford them a home , for many the first piece of property that they would ever know , and a community with other first - time African - American home buyers .
The first couple of decades of their life in the North is quite well , up until about 1950 , which coincides with the citys peak population at 1.8 million people .
Now its at this time that Detroit begins to see a second kind of migration , a migration to the suburbs .
Between 1950 and 2000 , the region grows by 30 percent .
But this time , the migration leaves African - Americans in place , as families and businesses flee the city , leaving the city pretty desolate of people as well as jobs .
During that same period , between 1950 and 2000 , 2010 , the city loses 60 percent of its population , and today it hovers at above 700,000 .
The audience members who come and talk to us that night tell us the stories of what its like to live in a city with such depleted population .
Many tell us that theyre one of only a few homes on their block that are occupied , and that they can see several abandoned homes from where they sit on their porches .
Citywide , there are 80,000 vacant homes .
They can also see vacant property .
Theyre beginning to see illegal activities on these properties , like illegal dumping , and they know that because the city has lost so much population , their costs for water , electricity , gas are rising , because there are not enough people to pay property taxes to help support the services that they need .
Citywide , there are about 100,000 vacant parcels .
Now , to quickly give you all a sense of a scale , because I know that sounds like a big number , but I dont think you quite understand until you look at the city map .
So the city is 139 square miles .
You can fit Boston , San Francisco , and the island of Manhattan within its footprint .
So if we take all of that vacant and abandoned property and we smush it together , it looks like about 20 square miles , and thats roughly equivalent to the size of the island were sitting on today , Manhattan , at 22 square miles .
So its a lot of vacancy .
Now some of our audience members also tell us about some of the positive things that are happening in their communities , and many of them are banding together to take control of some of the vacant lots , and theyre starting community gardens , which are creating a great sense of community stewardship , but theyre very , very clear to tell us that this is not enough , that they want to see their neighborhoods return to the way that their grandparents had found them .
Now theres been a lot of speculation since 2010 about what to do with the vacant property , and a lot of that speculation has been around community gardening , or what we call urban agriculture .
So many people would say to us ,  What if you just take all that vacant land and you could make it farmland ?
It can provide fresh foods , and it can put Detroiters back to work too . 
When I hear that story , I always imagine the folks from the Great Migration rolling over in their graves , because you can imagine that they didnt sacrifice moving from the South to the North to create a better life for their families , only to see their great - grandchildren return to an agrarian lifestyle , especially in a city where they came with little less than a high school education or even a grammar school education and were able to afford the basic elements of the American dream : steady work and a home that they owned .
Now , theres a third wave of migration happening in Detroit : a new ascendant of cultural entrepreneurs .
These folks see that same vacant land and those same abandoned homes as opportunity for new , entrepreneurial ideas and profit , so much so that former models can move to Detroit , buy property , start successful businesses and restaurants , and become successful community activists in their neighborhood , bringing about very positive change .
Similarly , we have small manufacturing companies making conscious decisions to relocate to the city .
This company , Shinola , which is a luxury watch and bicycle company , deliberately chose to relocate to Detroit , and they quote themselves by saying they were drawn to the global brand of Detroits innovation .
And they also knew that they can tap into a workforce that was still very skilled in how to make things .
Now we have community stewardship happening in neighborhoods , we have cultural entrepreneurs making decisions to move to the city and create enterprises , and we have businesses relocating , and this is all in the context of what is no secret to us all , a city thats under the control of an emergency manager , and just this July filed for Chapter 9 bankruptcy .
So 2010 , we started this process , and by 2013 , we released Detroit Future City , which was our strategic plan to guide the city into a better and more prosperous and more sustainable existence  -  -  not what it was , but what it could be , looking at new ways of economic growth , new forms of land use , more sustainable and denser neighborhoods , a reconfigured infrastructure and city service system , and a heightened capacity for civic leaders to take action and implement change .
Three key imperatives were really important to our work .
One was that the city itself wasnt necessarily too large , but the economy was too small .
There are only 27 jobs per 100 people in Detroit , very different from a Denver or an Atlanta or a Philadelphia that are anywhere between 35 to 70 jobs per 100 people .
Secondly , there had to be an acceptance that we were not going to be able to use all of this vacant land in the way that we had before and maybe for some time to come .
It wasnt going to be our traditional residential neighborhoods as we had before , and urban agriculture , while a very productive and successful intervention happening in Detroit , was not the only answer , that what we had to do is look at these areas where we had significant vacancy but still had a significant number of population of what could be new , productive , innovative , and entrepreneurial uses that could stabilize those communities , where still nearly 300,000 residents lived .
So we came up with one neighborhood typology  -  -  there are several  -  -  called a live - make neighborhood , where folks could reappropriate abandoned structures and turn them into entrepreneurial enterprises , with a specific emphasis on looking at the , again , majority 82 percent African - American population .
So they , too , could take businesses that they maybe were doing out of their home and grow them to more prosperous industries and actually acquire property so they were actually property owners as well as business owners in the communities with which they resided .
Then we also wanted to look at other ways of using land in addition to growing food and transforming landscape into much more productive uses , so that it could be used for storm water management , for example , by using surface lakes and retention ponds , that created neighborhood amenities , places of recreation , and actually helped to elevate adjacent property levels .
Or we could use it as research plots , where we can use it to remediate contaminated soils , or we could use it to generate energy .
So the descendants of the Great Migration could either become precision watchmakers at Shinola , like Willie H. , who was featured in one of their ads last year , or they can actually grow a business that would service companies like Shinola .
The good news is , there is a future for the next generation of Detroiters , both those there now and those that want to come .
So no thank you , Mayor Menino , who recently was quoted as saying ,  Id blow up the place and start over . 
There are very important people , business and land assets in Detroit , and there are real opportunities there .
So while Detroit might not be what it was , Detroit will not die .
Thank you .
Anil Ananthaswamy : What it takes to do extreme astrophysics
All over the planet , giant telescopes and detectors are looking for clues to the workings of the universe . At the INK Conference , science writer Anil Ananthaswamy tours us around these amazing installations , taking us to some of the most remote and silent places on Earth .
I would like to talk today about what I think is one of the greatest adventures human beings have embarked upon , which is the quest to understand the universe and our place in it .
My own interest in this subject , and my passion for it , began rather accidentally .
I had bought a copy of this book ,  The Universe and Dr . Einstein   -  -  a used paperback from a secondhand bookstore in Seattle .
A few years after that , in Bangalore , I was finding it hard to fall asleep one night , and I picked up this book , thinking it would put me to sleep in 10 minutes .
And as it happened , I read it from midnight to five in the morning in one shot .
And I was left with this intense feeling of awe and exhilaration at the universe and our own ability to understand as much as we do .
And that feeling hasnt left me yet .
That feeling was the trigger for me to actually change my career  -  -  from being a software engineer to become a science writer  -  -  so that I could partake in the joy of science , and also the joy of communicating it to others .
And that feeling also led me to a pilgrimage of sorts , to go literally to the ends of the earth to see telescopes , detectors , instruments that people are building , or have built , in order to probe the cosmos in greater and greater detail .
So it took me from places like Chile  -  -  the Atacama Desert in Chile  -  -  to Siberia , to underground mines in the Japanese Alps , in Northern America , all the way to Antarctica and even to the South Pole .
And today I would like to share with you some images , some stories of these trips .
I have been basically spending the last few years documenting the efforts of some extremely intrepid men and women who are putting , literally at times , their lives at stake working in some very remote and very hostile places so that they may gather the faintest signals from the cosmos in order for us to understand this universe .
And I first begin with a pie chart  -  -  and I promise this is the only pie chart in the whole presentation  -  -  but it sets up the state of our knowledge of the cosmos .
All the theories in physics that we have today properly explain what is called normal matter  -  -  the stuff that were all made of  -  -  and thats four percent of the universe .
Astronomers and cosmologists and physicists think that there is something called dark matter in the universe , which makes up 23 percent of the universe , and something called dark energy , which permeates the fabric of space - time , that makes up another 73 percent .
So if you look at this pie chart , 96 percent of the universe , at this point in our exploration of it , is unknown or not well understood .
And most of the experiments , telescopes that I went to see are in some way addressing this question , these two twin mysteries of dark matter and dark energy .
I will take you first to an underground mine in Northern Minnesota where people are looking for something called dark matter .
And the idea here is that they are looking for a sign of a dark matter particle hitting one of their detectors .
And the reason why they have to go underground is that , if you did this experiment on the surface of the Earth , the same experiment would be swamped by signals that could be created by things like cosmic rays , ambient radio activity , even our own bodies . You might not believe it , but even our own bodies are radioactive enough to disturb this experiment .
So they go deep inside mines to find a kind of environmental silence that will allow them to hear the ping of a dark matter particle hitting their detector .
And I went to see one of these experiments , and this is actually  -  -  you can barely see it , and the reason for that is its entirely dark in there  -  -  this is a cavern that was left behind by the miners who left this mine in 1960 .
And physicists came and started using it sometime in the 1980s .
And the miners in the early part of the last century worked , literally , in candlelight .
And today , you would see this inside the mine , half a mile underground .
This is one of the largest underground labs in the world .
And , among other things , theyre looking for dark matter .
There is another way to search for dark matter , which is indirectly .
If dark matter exists in our universe , in our galaxy , then these particles should be smashing together and producing other particles that we know about  -  -  one of them being neutrinos .
And neutrinos you can detect by the signature they leave when they hit water molecules .
When a neutrino hits a water molecule it emits a kind of blue light , a flash of blue light , and by looking for this blue light , you can essentially understand something about the neutrino and then , indirectly , something about the dark matter that might have created this neutrino .
But you need very , very large volumes of water in order to do this .
You need something like tens of megatons of water  -  -  almost a gigaton of water  -  -  in order to have any chance of catching this neutrino .
And where in the world would you find such water ?
Well the Russians have a tank in their own backyard .
This is Lake Baikal .
It is the largest lake in the world . Its 800 km long .
Its about 40 to 50 km wide in most places , and one to two kilometers deep .
And what the Russians are doing is theyre building these detectors and immersing them about a kilometer beneath the surface of the lake so that they can watch for these flashes of blue light .
And this is the scene that greeted me when I landed there .
This is Lake Baikal in the peak of the Siberian winter .
The lake is entirely frozen .
And the line of black dots that you see in the background , thats the ice camp where the physicists are working .
The reason why they have to work in winter is because they dont have the money to work in summer and spring , which , if they did that , they would need ships and submersibles to do their work .
So they wait until winter  -  -  the lake is completely frozen over  -  -  and they use this meter - thick ice as a platform on which to establish their ice camp and do their work .
So this is the Russians working on the ice in the peak of the Siberian winter .
They have to drill holes in the ice , dive down into the water  -  -  cold , cold water  -  -  to get hold of the instrument , bring it up , do any repairs and maintenance that they need to do , put it back and get out before the ice melts .
Because that phase of solid ice lasts for two months and its full of cracks .
And you have to imagine , theres an entire sea - like lake underneath , moving .
I still dont understand this one Russian man working in his bare chest , but that tells you how hard he was working .
And these people , a handful of people , have been working for 20 years , looking for particles that may or may not exist .
And they have dedicated their lives to it .
And just to give you an idea , they have spent 20 million over 20 years .
Its very harsh conditions .
They work on a shoestring budget .
The toilets there are literally holes in the ground covered with a wooden shack .
And its that basic , but they do this every year .
From Siberia to the Atacama Desert in Chile , to see something called The Very Large Telescope .
The Very Large Telescope is one of these things that astronomers do  -  -  they name their telescopes rather unimaginatively .
I can tell you for a fact , that the next one that theyre planning is called The Extremely Large Telescope .
And you wouldnt believe it , but the one after that is going to be called The Overwhelmingly Large Telescope .
But nonetheless , its an extraordinary piece of engineering .
These are four 8.2 meter telescopes .
And these telescopes , among other things , theyre being used to study how the expansion of the universe is changing with time .
And the more you understand that , the better you would understand what this dark energy that the universe is made of is all about .
And one piece of engineering that I want to leave you with as regards this telescope is the mirror .
Each mirror , there are four of them , is made of a single piece of glass , a monolithic piece of high - tech ceramic , that has been ground down and polished to such accuracy that the only way to understand what that is is  to  imagine a city like Paris , with all its buildings and the Eiffel Tower , if you grind down Paris to that kind of accuracy , you would be left with bumps that are one millimeter high .
And thats the kind of polishing that these mirrors have endured .
An extraordinary set of telescopes .
Heres another view of the same .
The reason why you have to build these telescopes in places like the Atacama Desert is because of the high altitude desert .
The dry air is really good for telescopes , and also , the cloud cover is below the summit of these mountains so that the telescopes have about 300 days of clear skies .
Finally , I want to take you to Antarctica .
I want to spend most of my time on this part of the world .
This is cosmologys final frontier .
Some of the most amazing experiments , some of the most extreme experiments , are being done in Antarctica .
I was there to view something called a long - duration balloon flight , which basically takes telescopes and instruments all the way to the upper atmosphere , the upper stratosphere , 40 km up .
And thats where they do their experiments , and then the balloon , the payload , is brought down .
So this is us landing on the Ross Ice Shelf in Antarctica .
Thats an American C - 17 cargo plane that flew us from New Zealand to McMurdo in Antarctica .
And here we are about to board our bus .
And I dont know if you can read the lettering , but it says ,  Ivan the Terribus . 
And thats taking us to McMurdo .
And this is the scene that greets you in McMurdo .
And you barely might be able to make out this hut here .
This hut was built by Robert Falcon Scott and his men when they first came to Antarctica on their first expedition to go to the South Pole .
Because its so cold , the entire contents of that hut is still as they left it , with the remnants of the last meal they cooked still there .
Its an extraordinary place .
This is McMurdo itself . About a thousand people work here in summer , and about 200 in winter when its completely dark for six months .
I was here to see the launch of this particular type of instrument .
This is a cosmic ray experiment that has been launched all the way to the upper - stratosphere to an altitude of 40 km .
What I want you to imagine is this is two tons in weight .
So youre using a balloon to carry something that is two tons all the way to an altitude of 40 km .
And the engineers , the technicians , the physicists have all got to assemble on the Ross Ice Shelf , because Antarctica  -  -  I wont go into the reasons why  -  -  but its one of the most favorable places for doing these balloon launches , except for the weather .
The weather , as you can imagine , this is summer , and youre standing on 200 ft of ice .
And theres a volcano behind , which has glaciers at the very top .
And what they have to do is they have to assemble the entire balloon  -  -  the fabric , parachute and everything  -  -  on the ice and then fill it up with helium .
And that process takes about two hours .
And the weather can change as theyre putting together this whole assembly .
For instance , here they are laying down the balloon fabric behind , which is eventually going to be filled up with helium .
Those two trucks you see at the very end carry 12 tanks each of compressed helium .
Now , in case the weather changes before the launch , they have to actually pack everything back up into their boxes and take it out back to McMurdo Station .
And this particular balloon , because it has to launch two tons of weight , is an extremely huge balloon .
The fabric alone weighs two tons .
In order to minimize the weight , its very thin , its as thin as a sandwich wrapper .
And if they have to pack it back , they have to put it into boxes and stamp on it so that it fits into the box again  -  -  except , when they did it first , Here , they cant do it with the kind shoes theyre wearing , so they have to take their shoes off , get barefoot into the boxes , in this cold , and do that kind of work .
Thats the kind of dedication these people have .
Heres the balloon being filled up with helium , and you can see its a gorgeous sight .
Heres a scene that shows you the balloon and the payload end - to - end .
So the balloon is being filled up with helium on the left - hand side , and the fabric actually runs all the way to the middle where theres a piece of electronics and explosives being connected to a parachute , and then the parachute is then connected to the payload .
And remember , all this wiring is being done by people in extreme cold , in sub - zero temperatures .
Theyre wearing about 15 kg of clothing and stuff , but they have to take their gloves off in order to do that .
And I would like to share with you a launch .
Radio : Okay , release the balloon , release the balloon , release the balloon .
Anil Ananthaswamy : And Ill finally like to leave you with two images .
This is an observatory in the Himalayas , in Ladakh in India .
And the thing I want you to look at here is the telescope on the right - hand side .
And on the far left there is a 400 year - old Buddhist monastery .
This is a close - up of the Buddhist monastery .
And I was struck by the juxtaposition of these two enormous disciplines that humanity has .
One is exploring the cosmos on the outside , and the other one is exploring our interior being .
And both require silence of some sort .
And what struck me was every place that I went to to see these telescopes , the astronomers and cosmologists are in search of a certain kind of silence , whether its silence from radio pollution or light pollution or whatever .
And it was very obvious that , if we destroy these silent places on Earth , we will be stuck on a planet without the ability to look outwards , because we will not be able to understand the signals that come from outer space .
Thank you .
Steven Johnson : Where good ideas come from
People often credit their ideas to individual  Eureka !  moments . But Steven Johnson shows how history tells a different story . His fascinating tour takes us from the  liquid networks  of Londons coffee houses to Charles Darwins long , slow hunch to todays high - velocity web .
Just a few minutes ago , I took this picture about 10 blocks from here .
This is the Grand Cafe here in Oxford .
I took this picture because this turns out to be the first coffeehouse to open in England in 1650 .
Thats its great claim to fame , and I wanted to show it to you , not because I want to give you the kind of Starbucks tour of historic England , but rather because the English coffeehouse was crucial to the development and spread of one of the great intellectual flowerings of the last 500 years , what we now call the Enlightenment .
And the coffeehouse played such a big role in the birth of the Enlightenment , in part , because of what people were drinking there .
Because , before the spread of coffee and tea through British culture , what people drank  -  -  both elite and mass folks drank  -  -  day - in and day - out , from dawn until dusk was alcohol .
Alcohol was the daytime beverage of choice .
You would drink a little beer with breakfast and have a little wine at lunch , a little gin  -  -  particularly around 1650  -  -  and top it off with a little beer and wine at the end of the day .
That was the healthy choice  -  -  right  -  -  because the water wasnt safe to drink .
And so , effectively until the rise of the coffeehouse , you had an entire population that was effectively drunk all day .
And you can imagine what that would be like , right , in your own life  -  -  and I know this is true of some of you  -  -  if you were drinking all day , and then you switched from a depressant to a stimulant in your life , you would have better ideas .
You would be sharper and more alert .
And so its not an accident that a great flowering of innovation happened as England switched to tea and coffee .
But the other thing that makes the coffeehouse important is the architecture of the space .
It was a space where people would get together from different backgrounds , different fields of expertise , and share .
It was a space , as Matt Ridley talked about , where ideas could have sex .
This was their conjugal bed , in a sense  -  -  ideas would get together there .
And an astonishing number of innovations from this period have a coffeehouse somewhere in their story .
Ive been spending a lot of time thinking about coffeehouses for the last five years , because Ive been kind of on this quest to investigate this question of where good ideas come from .
What are the environments that lead to unusual levels of innovation , unusual levels of creativity ?
Whats the kind of environmental  -  -  what is the space of creativity ?
And what Ive done is Ive looked at both environments like the coffeehouse ; Ive looked at media environments , like the world wide web , that have been extraordinarily innovative ; Ive gone back to the history of the first cities ; Ive even gone to biological environments , like coral reefs and rainforests , that involve unusual levels of biological innovation ; and what Ive been looking for is shared patterns , kind of signature behavior that shows up again and again in all of these environments .
Are there recurring patterns that we can learn from , that we can take and kind of apply to our own lives , or our own organizations , or our own environments to make them more creative and innovative ?
And I think Ive found a few .
But what you have to do to make sense of this and to really understand these principles is you have to do away with a lot of the way in which our conventional metaphors and language steers us towards certain concepts of idea - creation .
We have this very rich vocabulary to describe moments of inspiration .
We have the kind of the flash of insight , the stroke of insight , we have epiphanies , we have  eureka !  moments , we have the lightbulb moments , right ?
All of these concepts , as kind of rhetorically florid as they are , share this basic assumption , which is that an idea is a single thing , its something that happens often in a wonderful illuminating moment .
But in fact , what I would argue and what you really need to kind of begin with is this idea that an idea is a network on the most elemental level .
I mean , this is what is happening inside your brain .
An idea  -  -  a new idea  -  -  is a new network of neurons firing in sync with each other inside your brain .
Its a new configuration that has never formed before .
And the question is : how do you get your brain into environments where these new networks are going to be more likely to form ?
And it turns out that , in fact , the kind of network patterns of the outside world mimic a lot of the network patterns of the internal world of the human brain .
So the metaphor Id like the use I can take from a story of a great idea thats quite recent  -  -  a lot more recent than the 1650s .
A wonderful guy named Timothy Prestero , who has a company called ... an organization called Design That Matters .
They decided to tackle this really pressing problem of , you know , the terrible problems we have with infant mortality rates in the developing world .
One of the things thats very frustrating about this is that we know , by getting modern neonatal incubators into any context , if we can keep premature babies warm , basically  -  -  its very simple  -  -  we can halve infant mortality rates in those environments .
So , the technology is there .
These are standard in all the industrialized worlds .
The problem is , if you buy a $ 40,000 incubator , and you send it off to a mid - sized village in Africa , it will work great for a year or two years , and then something will go wrong and it will break , and it will remain broken forever , because you dont have a whole system of spare parts , and you dont have the on - the - ground expertise to fix this $ 40,000 piece of equipment .
And so you end up having this problem where you spend all this money getting aid and all these advanced electronics to these countries , and then it ends up being useless .
So what Prestero and his team decided to do is to look around and see : what are the abundant resources in these developing world contexts ?
And what they noticed was they dont have a lot of DVRs , they dont have a lot of microwaves , but they seem to do a pretty good job of keeping their cars on the road .
Theres a Toyota Forerunner on the street in all these places .
They seem to have the expertise to keep cars working .
So they started to think ,  Could we build a neonatal incubator thats built entirely out of automobile parts ? 
And this is what they ended up coming with .
Its called a  neonurture device . 
From the outside , it looks like a normal little thing youd find in a modern , Western hospital .
In the inside , its all car parts .
Its got a fan , its got headlights for warmth , its got door chimes for alarm  -  -  it runs off a car battery .
And so all you need is the spare parts from your Toyota and the ability to fix a headlight , and you can repair this thing .
Now , thats a great idea , but what Id like to say is that , in fact , this is a great metaphor for the way that ideas happen .
We like to think our breakthrough ideas , you know , are like that $ 40,000 , brand new incubator , state - of - the - art technology , but more often than not , theyre cobbled together from whatever parts that happen to be around nearby .
We take ideas from other people , from people weve learned from , from people we run into in the coffee shop , and we stitch them together into new forms and we create something new .
Thats really where innovation happens .
And that means that we have to change some of our models of what innovation and deep thinking really looks like , right .
I mean , this is one vision of it .
Another is Newton and the apple , when Newton was at Cambridge .
This is a statue from Oxford .
You know , youre sitting there thinking a deep thought , and the apple falls from the tree , and you have the theory of gravity .
In fact , the spaces that have historically led to innovation tend to look like this , right .
This is Hogarths famous painting of a kind of political dinner at a tavern , but this is what the coffee shops looked like back then .
This is the kind of chaotic environment where ideas were likely to come together , where people were likely to have new , interesting , unpredictable collisions  -  -  people from different backgrounds .
So , if were trying to build organizations that are more innovative , we have to build spaces that  -  -  strangely enough  -  -  look a little bit more like this .
This is what your office should look like , is part of my message here .
And one of the problems with this is that people are actually  -  -  when you research this field  -  -  people are notoriously unreliable , when they actually kind of self - report on where they have their own good ideas , or their history of their best ideas .
And a few years ago , a wonderful researcher named Kevin Dunbar decided to go around and basically do the Big Brother approach to figuring out where good ideas come from .
He went to a bunch of science labs around the world and videotaped everyone as they were doing every little bit of their job .
So when they were sitting in front of the microscope , when they were talking to their colleague at the water cooler , and all these things .
And he recorded all of these conversations and tried to figure out where the most important ideas , where they happened .
And when we think about the classic image of the scientist in the lab , we have this image  -  -  you know , theyre pouring over the microscope , and they see something in the tissue sample .
And  oh , eureka ,  theyve got the idea .
What happened actually when Dunbar kind of looked at the tape is that , in fact , almost all of the important breakthrough ideas did not happen alone in the lab , in front of the microscope .
They happened at the conference table at the weekly lab meeting , when everybody got together and shared their kind of latest data and findings , oftentimes when people shared the mistakes they were having , the error , the noise in the signal they were discovering .
And something about that environment  -  -  and Ive started calling it the  liquid network ,  where you have lots of different ideas that are together , different backgrounds , different interests , jostling with each other , bouncing off each other  -  -  that environment is , in fact , the environment that leads to innovation .
The other problem that people have is they like to condense their stories of innovation down to kind of shorter time frames .
So they want to tell the story of the  eureka !  moment .
They want to say ,  There I was , I was standing there and I had it all suddenly clear in my head . 
it turns out that a lot of important ideas have very long incubation periods  -  -  I call this the  slow hunch . 
Weve heard a lot recently about hunch and instinct and blink - like sudden moments of clarity , but in fact , a lot of great ideas linger on , sometimes for decades , in the back of peoples minds .
They have a feeling that theres an interesting problem , but they dont quite have the tools yet to discover them .
They spend all this time working on certain problems , but theres another thing lingering there that theyre interested in , but they cant quite solve .
Darwin is a great example of this .
Darwin himself , in his autobiography , tells the story of coming up with the idea for natural selection as a classic  eureka !  moment .
Hes in his study , its October of 1838 , and hes reading Malthus , actually , on population .
And all of a sudden , the basic algorithm of natural selection kind of pops into his head and he says ,  Ah , at last , I had a theory with which to work . 
Thats in his autobiography .
About a decade or two ago , a wonderful scholar named Howard Gruber went back and looked at Darwins notebooks from this period .
And Darwin kept these copious notebooks where he wrote down every little idea he had , every little hunch .
And what Gruber found was that Darwin had the full theory of natural selection for months and months and months before he had his alleged epiphany , reading Malthus in October of 1838 .
There are passages where you can read it , and you think youre reading from a Darwin textbook , from the period before he has this epiphany .
And so what you realize is that Darwin , in a sense , had the idea , he had the concept , but was unable of fully thinking it yet .
And that is actually how great ideas often happen ; they fade into view over long periods of time .
Now the challenge for all of us is : how do you create environments that allow these ideas to have this kind of long half - life , right ?
Its hard to go to your boss and say ,  I have an excellent idea for our organization .
It will be useful in 2020 .
Could you just give me some time to do that ? 
Now a couple of companies  -  -  like Google  -  -  they have innovation time off , 20 percent time , where , in a sense , those are hunch - cultivating mechanisms in an organization .
But thats a key thing .
And the other thing is to allow those hunches to connect with other peoples hunches ; thats what often happens .
You have half of an idea , somebody else has the other half , and if youre in the right environment , they turn into something larger than the sum of their parts .
So , in a sense , we often talk about the value of protecting intellectual property , you know , building barricades , having secretive R and D labs , patenting everything that we have , so that those ideas will remain valuable , and people will be incentivized to come up with more ideas , and the culture will be more innovative .
But I think theres a case to be made that we should spend at least as much time , if not more , valuing the premise of connecting ideas and not just protecting them .
And Ill leave you with this story , which I think captures a lot of these values , and its just wonderful kind of tale of innovation and how it happens in unlikely ways .
Its October of 1957 , and Sputnik has just launched , and were in Laurel Maryland , at the applied physics lab associated with Johns Hopkins University .
And its Monday morning , and the news has just broken about this satellite thats now orbiting the planet .
And of course , this is nerd heaven , right ?
There are all these physics geeks who are there thinking ,  Oh my gosh ! This is incredible . I cant believe this has happened . 
And two of them , two 20 - something researchers at the APL are there at the cafeteria table having an informal conversation with a bunch of their colleagues .
And these two guys are named Guier and Weiffenbach .
And they start talking , and one of them says ,  Hey , has anybody tried to listen for this thing ?
Theres this , you know , man - made satellite up there in outer space thats obviously broadcasting some kind of signal .
We could probably hear it , if we tune in . 
And so they ask around to a couple of their colleagues , and everybodys like ,  No , I hadnt thought of doing that .
Thats an interesting idea . 
And it turns out Weiffenbach is kind of an expert in microwave reception , and hes got a little antennae set up with an amplifier in his office .
And so Guier and Weiffenbach go back to Weiffenbachs office , and they start kind of noodling around  -  -  hacking , as we might call it now .
And after a couple of hours , they actually start picking up the signal , because the Soviets made Sputnik very easy to track .
It was right at 20 MHz , so you could pick it up really easily , because they were afraid that people would think it was a hoax , basically .
So they made it really easy to find it .
So these two guys are sitting there listening to this signal , and people start kind of coming into the office and saying ,  Wow , thats pretty cool . Can I hear ? Wow , thats great . 
And before long , they think ,  Well jeez , this is kind of historic .
We may be the first people in the United States to be listening to this .
We should record it . 
And so they bring in this big , clunky analog tape recorder and they start recording these little bleep , bleeps .
And they start writing the kind of date stamp , time stamps for each little bleep that they record .
And they they start thinking ,  Well gosh , you know , were noticing small little frequency variations here .
We could probably calculate the speed that the satellite is traveling , if we do a little basic math here using the Doppler effect . 
And then they played around with it a little bit more , and they talked to a couple of their colleagues who had other kind of specialties .
And they said ,  Jeez , you know , we think we could actually take a look at the slope of the Doppler effect to figure out the points at which the satellite is closest to our antennae and the points at which its farthest away .
Thats pretty cool . 
And eventually , they get permission  -  -  this is all a little side project that hadnt been officially part of their job description .
They get permission to use the new , you know , UNIVAC computer that takes up an entire room that theyd just gotten at the APL .
They run some more of the numbers , and at the end of about three or four weeks , turns out they have mapped the exact trajectory of this satellite around the Earth , just from listening to this one little signal , going off on this little side hunch that theyd been inspired to do over lunch one morning .
A couple weeks later their boss , Frank McClure , pulls them into the room and says ,  Hey , you guys , I have to ask you something about that project you were working on .
Youve figured out an unknown location of a satellite orbiting the planet from a known location on the ground .
Could you go the other way ?
Could you figure out an unknown location on the ground , if you knew the location of the satellite ? 
And they thought about it and they said ,  Well , I guess maybe you could . Lets run the numbers here . 
So they went back , and they thought about it .
And they came back and said ,  Actually , itll be easier . 
And he said ,  Oh , thats great .
Because see , I have these new nuclear submarines that Im building .
And its really hard to figure out how to get your missile so that it will land right on top of Moscow , if you dont know where the submarine is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean .
So were thinking , we could throw up a bunch of satellites and use it to track our submarines and figure out their location in the middle of the ocean .
Could you work on that problem ? 
And thats how GPS was born .
30 years later , Ronald Reagan actually opened it up and made it an open platform that anybody could kind of build upon and anybody could come along and build new technology that would create and innovate on top of this open platform , left it open for anyone to do pretty much anything they wanted with it .
And now , I guarantee you certainly half of this room , if not more , has a device sitting in their pocket right now that is talking to one of these satellites in outer space .
And I bet you one of you , if not more , has used said device and said satellite system to locate a nearby coffeehouse somewhere in the last  -  -  in the last day or last week , right ?
And that , I think , is a great case study , a great lesson in the power , the marvelous , kind of unplanned emergent , unpredictable power of open innovative systems .
When you build them right , they will be led to completely new directions that the creators never even dreamed of .
I mean , here you have these guys who basically thought they were just following this hunch , this little passion that had developed , then they thought they were fighting the Cold War , and then it turns out theyre just helping somebody find a soy latte .
That is how innovation happens .
Chance favors the connected mind .
Thank you very much .
Pattie Maes + Pranav Mistry : Meet the SixthSense interaction
This demo  -  -  from Pattie Maes lab at MIT , spearheaded by Pranav Mistry  -  -  was the buzz of TED . Its a wearable device with a projector that paves the way for profound interaction with our environment . Imagine  Minority Report  and then some .
Ive been intrigued by this question of whether we could evolve or develop a sixth sense  -  -  a sense that would give us seamless access and easy access to meta - information or information that may exist somewhere that may be relevant to help us make the right decision about whatever it is that were coming across .
And some of you may argue , well , dont todays cell phones do that already ?
But I would say no .
When you meet someone here at TED  -  -  and this is the top networking place , of course , of the year  -  -  you dont shake somebodys hand and then say ,  Can you hold on for a moment while I take out my phone and Google you ? 
Or when you go to the supermarket and youre standing there in that huge aisle of different types of toilet papers , you dont take out your cell phone , and open a browser , and go to a website to try to decide which of these different toilet papers is the most ecologically responsible purchase to make .
So we dont really have easy access to all this relevant information that can just help us make optimal decisions about what to do next and what actions to take .
And so my research group at the Media Lab has been developing a series of inventions to give us access to this information in a sort of easy way , without requiring that the user changes any of their behavior .
And Im here to unveil our latest effort , and most successful effort so far , which is still very much a work in process .
Im actually wearing the device right now and weve sort of cobbled it together with components that are off the shelf  -  -  and that , by the way , only cost 350 dollars at this point in time .
Im wearing a camera , just a simple webcam , a portable , battery - powered projection system with a little mirror .
These components communicate to my cell phone in my pocket which acts as the communication and computation device .
And in the video here we see my student Pranav Mistry , whos really the genius whos been implementing and designing this whole system .
And we see how this system lets him walk up to any surface and start using his hands to interact with the information that is projected in front of him .
The system tracks the four significant fingers .
In this case , hes wearing simple marker caps that you may recognize .
But if you want a more stylish version you could also paint your nails in different colors .
And the camera basically tracks these four fingers and recognizes any gestures that hes making so he can just go to , for example , a map of Long Beach , zoom in and out , etc .
The system also recognizes iconic gestures such as the  take a picture  gesture , and then takes a picture of whatever is in front of you .
And when he then walks back to the Media Lab , he can just go up to any wall and project all the pictures that hes taken , sort through them and organize them , and re - size them , etc . , again using all natural gestures .
So , some of you most likely were here two years ago and saw the demo by Jeff Han or some of you may think ,  Well , doesnt this look like the Microsoft Surface Table ? 
And yes , you also interact using natural gestures , both hands , etc .
But the difference here is that you can use any surface , you can walk to up to any surface , including your hand if nothing else is available and interact with this projected data .
The device is completely portable , and can be ...
So one important difference is that its totally mobile .
Another even more important difference is that in mass production this would not cost more tomorrow than todays cell phones could look a lot more stylish than this version that Im wearing around my neck .
But other than letting some of you live out your fantasy of looking as cool as Tom Cruise in  Minority Report ,  the reason why were really excited about this device is that it really can act as one of these sixth - sense devices that gives you relevant information about whatever is in front of you .
So we see Pranav here going into the supermarket and hes shopping for some paper towels .
And , as he picks up a product the system can recognize the product that hes picking up , using either image recognition or marker technology , and give him the green light or an orange light .
He can ask for additional information .
So this particular choice here is a particularly good choice , given his personal criteria .
Some of you may want the toilet paper with the most bleach in it rather than the most ecologically - responsible choice .
If he picks up a book in the bookstore , he can get an Amazon rating  -  -  it gets projected right on the cover of the book .
This is Juans book , our previous speaker , which gets a great rating , by the way , at Amazon .
And so , Pranav turns the page of the book and can then see additional information about the book  -  -  reader comments , maybe sort of information by his favorite critic , etc .
If he turns to a particular page he finds an annotation by maybe an expert of a friend of ours that gives him a little bit of additional information about whatever is on that particular page .
Reading the newspaper  -  -  it never has to be outdated .
You can get video annotations of the event that youre reading about You can get the latest sports scores etc .
This is a more controversial one .
As you interact with someone at TED , maybe you can see a word cloud of the tags , the words that are associated with that person in their blog and personal web pages .
In this case , the student is interested in cameras , etc .
On your way to the airport , if you pick up your boarding pass , it can tell you that your flight is delayed , that the gate has changed , etc .
And , if you need to know what the current time is its as simple as drawing a watch  -  -  on your arm .
So thats where were at so far in developing this sixth sense that would give us seamless access to all this relevant information about the things that we may come across .
My student Pranav , whos really , like I said , the genius behind this .
He does deserve a lot of applause because I dont think hes slept much in the last three months , actually .
And his girlfriend is probably not very happy about him either .
But its not perfect yet , its very much a work in progress .
And who knows , maybe in another 10 years well be here with the ultimate sixth sense brain implant .
Thank you .
Harald Haas : Wireless data from every light bulb
What if every light bulb in the world could also transmit data ? At TEDGlobal , Harald Haas demonstrates , for the first time , a device that could do exactly that . By flickering the light from a single LED , a change too quick for the human eye to detect , he can transmit far more data than a cellular tower  -  -  and do it in a way thats more efficient , secure and widespread .
Do you know that we have 1.4 million cellular radio masts deployed worldwide ?
And these are base stations .
And we also have more than five billion of these devices here .
These are cellular mobile phones .
And with these mobile phones , we transmit more than 600 terabytes of data every month .
This is a 6 with 14 zeroes  -  -  a very large number .
And wireless communications has become a utility like electricity and water .
We use it everyday . We use it in our everyday lives now  -  -  in our private lives , in our business lives .
And we even have to be asked sometimes , very kindly , to switch off the mobile phone at events like this for good reasons .
And its this importance why I decided to look into the issues that this technology has , because its so fundamental to our lives .
And one of the issues is capacity .
The way we transmit wireless data is by using electromagnetic waves  -  -  in particular , radio waves .
And radio waves are limited .
They are scarce ; they are expensive ; and we only have a certain range of it .
And its this limitation that doesnt cope with the demand of wireless data transmissions and the number of bytes and data which are transmitted every month .
And we are simply running out of spectrum .
Theres another problem .
That is efficiency .
These 1.4 million cellular radio masts , or base stations , consume a lot of energy .
And mind you , most of the energy is not used to transmit the radio waves , it is used to cool the base stations .
Then the efficiency of such a base station is only at about five percent .
And that creates a big problem .
Then theres another issue that youre all aware of .
You have to switch off your mobile phone during flights .
In hospitals , they are security issues .
And security is another issue .
These radio waves penetrate through walls .
They can be intercepted , and somebody can make use of your network if he has bad intentions .
So these are the main four issues .
But on the other hand , we have 14 billion of these : light bulbs , light .
And light is part of the electromagnetic spectrum .
So lets look at this in the context of the entire electromagnetic spectrum , where we have gamma rays .
You dont want to get close to gamma rays , it could be dangerous .
X - rays , useful when you go to hospitals .
Then theres ultraviolet light .
its good for a nice suntan , but otherwise dangerous for the human body .
Infrared  -  -  due to eye safety regulations , can be only used with low power .
And then we have the radio waves , they have the issues Ive just mentioned .
And in the middle there , we have this visible light spectrum .
Its light , and light has been around for many millions of years .
And in fact , it has created us , has created life , has created all the stuff of life .
So its inherently safe to use .
And wouldnt it be great to use that for wireless communications ?
Not only that , I compared  it to  the entire spectrum .
I compared the radio waves spectrum  -  -  the size of it  -  -  with the size of the visible light spectrum .
And guess what ?
We have 10,000 times more of that spectrum , which is there for us to use .
So not only do we have this huge amount of spectrum , lets compare that with a number Ive just mentioned .
We have 1.4 million expensively deployed , inefficient radio cellular base stations .
And multiply that by 10,000 , then you end up at 14 billion .
14 billion is the number of light bulbs installed already .
So we have the infrastructure there .
Look at the ceiling , you see all these light bulbs .
Go to the main floor , you see these light bulbs .
Can we use them for communications ?
Yes .
What do we need to do ?
The one thing we need to do is we have to replace these inefficient incandescent light bulbs , florescent lights , with this new technology of LED , LED light bulbs .
An LED is a semiconductor . Its an electronic device .
And it has a very nice acute property .
Its intensity can be modulated at very high speeds , and it can be switched off at very high speeds .
And this is a fundamental basic property that we exploit with our technology .
So lets show how we do that .
Lets go to the closest neighbor to the visible light spectrum  -  -  go to remote controls .
You all know remote controls have an infrared LED  -  -  basically you switch on the LED , and if its off , you switch it off .
And it creates a simple , low - speed data stream in 10,000 bits per second , 20,000 bits per second .
Not usable for a YouTube video .
What we have done is we have developed a technology with which we can furthermore replace the remote control of our light bulb .
We transmit with our technology , not only a single data stream , we transmit thousands of data streams in parallel , at even higher speeds .
And the technology we have developed  -  -  its called SIM OFDM .
And its spacial modulation  -  -  these are the only technical terms , Im not going into details  -  -  but this is how we enabled that light source to transmit data .
You will say ,  Okay , this is nice  -  -  a slide created in 10 minutes . 
But not only that .
What weve done is we have also developed a demonstrator .
And Im showing for the first time in public this visible light demonstrator .
And what we have here is no ordinary desk lamp .
We fit in an LED light bulb , worth three U.S . dollars , put in our signal processing technology .
And then what we have here is a little hole .
And the light goes through that hole .
Theres a receiver .
The receiver will convert these little , subtle changes in the amplitude that we create there into an electrical signal .
And that signal is then converted back to a high - speed data stream .
In the future we hope that we can integrate this little hole into these smart phones .
And not only integrate a photo detector here , but maybe use the camera inside .
So what happens when I switch on that light ?
As you would expect , its a light , a desk lamp .
Put your book beneath it and you can read .
Its illuminating the space .
But at the same time , you see this video coming up here .
And thats a video , a high - definition video that is transmitted through that light beam .
Youre critical .
You think ,  Ha , ha , ha .
This is a smart academic doing a little bit of tricks here . 
But let me do this .
Once again .
Still dont believe ?
It is this light that transmits this high - definition video in a split stream .
And if you look at the light , it is illuminating as you would expect .
You dont notice with your human eye .
You dont notice the subtle changes in the amplitude that we impress onto this light bulb .
Its serving the purpose of illumination , but at the same time , we are able to transmit this data .
And you see , even light from the ceiling comes down here to the receiver .
It can ignore that constant light , because all the receivers interested in are subtle changes .
You also have a critical question now , and you say ,  Okay , do I have to have the light on all the time to have this working ? 
And the answer is yes .
But , you can dim down the light to a level that it appears to be off .
And you are still able to transmit data  -  -  thats possible .
So Ive mentioned to you the four challenges .
Capacity : We have 10,000 times more spectrum , 10,000 times more LEDs installed already in the infrastructure there .
You would agree with me , hopefully , theres no issue of capacity anymore .
Efficiency : This is data through illumination  -  -  its first of all an illumination device .
And if you do the energy budget , the data transmission comes for free  -  -  highly energy efficient .
I dont mention the high energy efficiency of these LED light bulbs .
If the whole world would deploy them , you would save hundreds of power plants .
Thats aside .
And then Ive mentioned the availability .
You will agree with me that we have lights in the hospital .
You need to see what to do .
You have lights in an aircraft .
So its everywhere in a day there is light .
Look around . Everywhere . Look at your smart phone .
It has a flashlight , an LED flashlight .
These are potential sources for high - speed data transmission .
And then theres security .
You would agree with me that light doesnt penetrate through walls .
So no one , if I have a light here , if I have secure data , no one on the other side of this room through that wall would be able to read that data .
And theres only data where there is light .
So if I dont want that receiver to receive the data , then what I could do , turn it away .
So the data goes in that direction , not there anymore .
Now we can in fact see where the data is going to .
So for me , the applications of it , to me , are beyond imagination at the moment .
We have had a century of very nice , smart application developers .
And you only have to notice , where we have light , there is a potential way to transmit data .
But I can give you a few examples .
Well you may see the impact already now .
This is a remote operated vehicle beneath the ocean .
And they use light to illuminate space down there .
And this light can be used to transmit wireless data that these things  use  to communicate with each other .
Intrinsically safe environments like this petrochemical plant  -  -  you cant use RF , it may generate antenna sparks , but you can use light  -  -  you see plenty of light there .
In hospitals , for new medical instruments ; in streets for traffic control .
Cars have LED - based headlights , LED - based back lights , and cars can communicate with each other and prevent accidents in the way that they exchange information .
Traffic lights can communicate to the car and so on .
And then you have these millions of street lamps deployed around the world .
And every street lamp could be a free access point .
We call it , in fact , a Li - Fi , light - fidelity .
And then we have these aircraft cabins .
There are hundreds of lights in an aircraft cabin , and each of these lights could be a potential transmitter of wireless data .
So you could enjoy your most favorite TED video on your long flight back home .
Online life . So that is a vision , I think , that is possible .
So , all we would need to do is to fit a small microchip to every potential illumination device .
And this would then combine two basic functionalities : illumination and wireless data transmission .
And its this symbiosis that I personally believe could solve the four essential problems that face us in wireless communication these days .
And in the future , you would not only have 14 billion light bulbs , you may have 14 billion Li - Fis deployed worldwide  -  -  for a cleaner , a greener , and even a brighter future .
Thank you .
Daniel Kraft : A better way to harvest bone marrow
Daniel Kraft demos his Marrow Miner  -  -  a new device that quickly harvests life - saving bone marrow with minimal pain to the donor . He emphasizes that the adult stem cells found in bone marrow can be used to treat many terminal conditions , from Parkinsons to heart disease .
So I am a pediatric cancer doctor and stem - cell researcher at Stanford University where my clinical focus has been bone marrow transplantation .
Now , inspired by Jill Bolte Taylor last year , I didnt bring a human brain , but I did bring a liter of bone marrow .
And bone marrow is actually what we use to save the lives of tens of thousands of patients , most of whom have advanced malignancies like leukemia and lymphoma and some other diseases .
So , a few years ago , Im doing my transplant fellowship at Stanford .
Im in the operating room . We have Bob here , who is a volunteer donor .
Were sending his marrow across the country to save the life of a child with leukemia .
So actually how do we harvest this bone marrow ?
Well we have a whole O.R. team , general anesthesia , nurses , and another doctor across from me .
Bobs on the table , and we take this sort of small needle , you know , not too big .
And the way we do this is we basically place this through the soft tissue , and kind of punch it into the hard bone , into the tuchus  -  -  thats a technical term  -  -  and aspirate about 10 mls of bone marrow out , each time , with a syringe .
And hand it off to the nurse . She squirts it into a tin .
Hands it back to me . And we do that again and again .
About 200 times usually .
And by the end of this my arm is sore , Ive got a callus on my hand , let alone Bob , whose rear end looks something more like this , like Swiss cheese .
So Im thinking , you know , this procedure hasnt changed in about 40 years .
And there is probably a better way to do this .
So I thought of a minimally invasive approach , and a new device that we call the Marrow Miner .
This is it .
And the Marrow Miner , the way it works is shown here .
Our standard see - through patient .
Instead of entering the bone dozens of times , we enter just once , into the front of the hip or the back of the hip .
And we have a flexible , powered catheter with a special wire loop tip that stays inside the crunchy part of the marrow and follows the contours of the hip , as it moves around .
So it enables you to very rapidly aspirate , or suck out , rich bone marrow very quickly through one hole .
We can do multiple passes through that same entry .
No robots required .
And , so , very quickly , Bob can just get one puncture , local anesthesia , and do this harvest as an outpatient .
So I did a few prototypes . I got a small little grant at Stanford .
And played around with this a little bit .
And our team members developed this technology .
And eventually we got two large animals , and pig studies .
And we found , to our surprise , that we not only got bone marrow out , but we got 10 times the stem cell activity in the marrow from the Marrow Miner , compared to the normal device .
This device was just FDA approved in the last year .
Here is a live patient . You can see it following the flexible curves around .
There will be two passes here , in the same patient , from the same hole .
This was done under local anesthesia , as an outpatient .
And we got , again , about three to six times more stem cells than the standard approach done on the same patient .
So why should you care ? Bone marrow is a very rich source of adult stem cells .
You all know about embryonic stem cells .
Theyve got great potential but havent yet entered clinical trials .
Adult stem cells are throughout our body , including the blood - forming stem cells in our bone marrow , which weve been using as a form of stem - cell therapy for over 40 years .
In the last decade theres been an explosion of use of bone marrow stem cells to treat the patients other diseases such as heart disease , vascular disease , orthopedics , tissue engineering , even in neurology to treat Parkinsons and diabetes .
Weve just come out , were commercializing , this year , generation 2.0 of the Marrow Miner .
The hope is that this gets more stem cells out , which translates to better outcomes .
It may encourage more people to sign up to be potential live - saving bone marrow donors .
It may even enable you to bank your own marrow stem cells , when youre younger and healthier , to use in the future should you need it .
And ultimately  -  -  and heres a picture of our bone marrow transplant survivors , who come together for a reunion each year at Stanford .
Hopefully this technology will let us have more of these survivors in the future .
Thanks .
Marco Tempest : A cyber - magic card trick like no other
The suits , numbers and colors in a deck of cards correspond to the seasons , moon cycles and calendar . Marco Tempest straps on augmented reality goggles and does a card trick like youve never seen before , weaving a lyrical tale as he deals .
Good morning . So magic is an excellent way for staying ahead of the reality curve , to make possible today what science will make a reality tomorrow .
As a cyber - magician , I combine elements of illusion and science to give us a feel of how future technologies might be experienced .
Youve probably all heard of Googles Project Glass .
Its new technology . You look through them and the world you see is augmented with data : names of places , monuments , buildings , maybe one day even the names of the strangers that pass you on the street .
So these are my illusion glasses .
Theyre a little bigger . Theyre a prototype .
And when you look through them , you get a glimpse into the mind of the cyber - illusionist .
Let me show you what I mean .
All we need is a playing card . Any card will do .
Like this . And let me mark it so we can recognize it when we see it again .
All right . Very significant mark .
And lets put it back into the deck , somewhere in the middle , and lets get started .
Voice : System ready . Acquiring image .
Marco Tempest : For those of you who dont play cards , a deck of cards is made up of four different suits : hearts , clubs , diamonds and spades .
The cards are amongst the oldest of symbols , and have been interpreted in many different ways .
Now , some say that the four suits represent the four seasons .
Theres spring , summer , autumn and a Voice : My favorite season is winter . MT : Well yeah , mine too .
Winter is like magic . Its a time of change , when warmth turns to cold , water turns to snow , and then it all disappears .
There are 13 cards in each suit .
Voice : Each card represents a phase of the 13 lunar cycles .
MT : So over here is low tide , and over here is high tide , and in the middle is the moon .
Voice : The moon is one of the most potent symbols of magic .
MT : There are two colors in a deck of cards .
There is the color red and the color black , representing the constant change from day to night .
Voice : Marco , I did not know you could do that .
MT : And is it a coincidence that there are 52 cards in a deck of cards , just as there are 52 weeks in a year ?
Voice : If you total all the spots on a deck of cards , the result is 365 .
MT : Oh , 365 , the number of days in a year , the number of days between each birthday .
Make a wish .
Voice : Dont tell , or it wont come true .
MT : Well , as a matter of fact , it was on my sixth birthday that I received my first deck of cards , and ever since that day , I have traveled around the world performing magic for boys and girls , men and women , husbands and wives , even kings and queens .
Voice : And who are these ? MT : Ah , mischief - makers . Watch .
Wake up .
Joker : Whoa . MT : Are you ready for your party piece ?
Joker : Ready ! MT : Let me see what youve got .
Joker : Presenting my pogo stick . MT : Ah . Watch out .
Joker : Whoa , whoa , whoa , oh !
MT : But today , I am performing for a different kind of audience .
Im performing for you .
Voice : Signed card detected . MT : Well , sometimes people ask me how do you become a magician ? Is it a 9 - to - 5 job ?
Of course not ! Youve got to practice 24 / 7 .
I dont literally mean 24 hours , seven days a week .
24 / 7 is a little bit of an exaggeration , but it does take practice . Now , some people will say , well , magic , that must be the work of some evil supernatural force .
Whoa .
Well , to this , I just say , no no .
Actually , in German , its nein nein .
Magic isnt that intense . I have to warn you , though , if you ever play with someone who deals cards like this , dont play for money .
Voice : Why not ? Thats a very good hand .
The odds of getting it are 4,165 to one .
MT : Yeah , but I guess my hand is better . We beat the odds .
Voice : I think you got your birthday wish . MT : And that actually leaves me with the last , and most important card of all : the one with this very significant mark on it .
And unlike anything else weve just seen , virtual or not . Voice : Signed card detected .
Digital MT : This is without a question the real thing .
MT : Bye bye .
Thank you .
Thank you very much .
Nancy Lublin : Texting that saves lives
When Nancy Lublin started texting teenagers to help with her social advocacy organization , what she found was shocking  -  -  they started texting back about their own problems , from bullying to depression to abuse . So shes setting up a text - only crisis line , and the results might be even more important than she expected .
To most of you , this is a device to buy , sell , play games , watch videos .
I think it might be a lifeline .
I think actually it might be able to save more lives than penicillin .
Texting : I know I say texting and a lot of you think sexting , a lot of you think about the lewd photos that you see  -  -  hopefully not your kids sending to somebody else  -  -  or trying to translate the abbreviations LOL , LMAO , HMU .
I can help you with those later .
But the parents in the room know that texting is actually the best way to communicate with your kids .
It might be the only way to communicate with your kids .
The average teenager sends 3,339 text messages a month , unless shes a girl , then its closer to 4,000 .
And the secret is she opens every single one .
Texting has a 100 percent open rate .
Now the parents are really alarmed .
Its a 100 percent open rate even if she doesnt respond to you when you ask her when shes coming home for dinner .
I promise she read that text .
And this isnt some suburban IPhone - using teen phenomenon .
Texting actually overindexes for minority and urban youth .
I know this because at DoSomething . org , which is the largest organization for teenagers and social change in America , about six months ago we pivoted and started focusing on text messaging .
Were now texting out to about 200,000 kids a week about doing our campaigns to make their schools more green or to work on homeless issues and things like that .
Were finding it 11 times more powerful than email .
Weve also found an unintended consequence .
Weve been getting text messages back like these .
 I dont want to go to school today .
The boys call me faggot . 
 I was cutting , my parents found out , and so I stopped .
But I just started again an hour ago . 
Or ,  He wont stop raping me .
He told me not to tell anyone .
Its my dad . Are you there ? 
That last ones an actual text message that we received .
And yeah , were there .
I will not forget the day we got that text message .
And so it was that day that we decided we needed to build a crisis text hotline .
Because this isnt what we do .
We do social change .
Kids are just sending us these text messages because texting is so familiar and comfortable to them and theres nowhere else to turn that theyre sending them to us .
So think about it , a text hotline ; its pretty powerful .
Its fast , its pretty private .
No one hears you in a stall , youre just texting quietly .
Its real time .
We can help millions of teens with counseling and referrals .
Thats great .
But the thing that really makes this awesome is the data .
Because Im not really comfortable just helping that girl with counseling and referrals .
I want to prevent this shit from happening .
So think about a cop .
Theres something in New York City .
The police did it . It used to be just guess work , police work .
And then they started crime mapping .
And so they started following and watching petty thefts , summonses , all kinds of things  -  -  charting the future essentially .
And they found things like , when you see crystal meth on the street , if you add police presence , you can curb the otherwise inevitable spate of assaults and robberies that would happen .
In fact , the year after the NYPD put CompStat in place , the murder rate fell 60 percent .
So think about the data from a crisis text line .
There is no census on bullying and dating abuse and eating disorders and cutting and rape  -  -  no census .
Maybe theres some studies , some longitudinal studies , that cost lots of money and took lots of time .
Or maybe theres some anecdotal evidence .
Imagine having real time data on every one of those issues .
You could inform legislation .
You could inform school policy .
You could say to a principal ,  Youre having a problem every Thursday at three oclock .
Whats going on in your school ? 
You could see the immediate impact of legislation or a hateful speech that somebody gives in a school assembly and see what happens as a result .
This is really , to me , the power of texting and the power of data .
Because while people are talking about data , making it possible for Facebook to mine my friend from the third grade , or Target to know when its time for me to buy more diapers , or some dude to build a better baseball team , Im actually really excited about the power of data and the power of texting to help that kid go to school , to help that girl stop cutting in the bathroom and absolutely to help that girl whose fathers raping her .
Thank you .
Phil Hansen : Embrace the shake
In art school , Phil Hansen developed an unruly tremor in his hand that kept him from creating the pointillist drawings he loved . Hansen was devastated , floating without a sense of purpose . Until a neurologist made a simple suggestion : embrace this limitation ... and transcend it .
So , when I was in art school , I developed a shake in my hand , and this was the straightest line I could draw .
Now in hindsight , it was actually good for some things , like mixing a can of paint or shaking a Polaroid , but at the time this was really doomsday .
This was the destruction of my dream of becoming an artist .
The shake developed out of , really , a single - minded pursuit of pointillism , just years of making tiny , tiny dots .
And eventually these dots went from being perfectly round to looking more like tadpoles , because of the shake .
So to compensate , Id hold the pen tighter , and this progressively made the shake worse , so Id hold the pen tighter still .
And this became a vicious cycle that ended up causing so much pain and joint issues , I had trouble holding anything .
And after spending all my life wanting to do art , I left art school , and then I left art completely .
But after a few years , I just couldnt stay away from art , and I decided to go to a neurologist about the shake and discovered I had permanent nerve damage .
And he actually took one look at my squiggly line , and said ,  Well , why dont you just embrace the shake ? 
So I did . I went home , I grabbed a pencil , and I just started letting my hand shake and shake .
I was making all these scribble pictures .
And even though it wasnt the kind of art that I was ultimately passionate about , it felt great .
And more importantly , once I embraced the shake , I realized I could still make art .
I just had to find a different approach to making the art that I wanted .
Now , I still enjoyed the fragmentation of pointillism , seeing these little tiny dots come together to make this unified whole .
So I began experimenting with other ways to fragment images where the shake wouldnt affect the work , like dipping my feet in paint and walking on a canvas , or , in a 3D structure consisting of two - by - fours , creating a 2D image by burning it with a blowtorch .
I discovered that , if I worked on a larger scale and with bigger materials , my hand really wouldnt hurt , and after having gone from a single approach to art , I ended up having an approach to creativity that completely changed my artistic horizons .
This was the first time Id encountered this idea that embracing a limitation could actually drive creativity .
At the time , I was finishing up school , and I was so excited to get a real job and finally afford new art supplies .
I had this horrible little set of tools , and I felt like I could do so much more with the supplies I thought an artist was supposed to have .
I actually didnt even have a regular pair of scissors .
I was using these metal shears until I stole a pair from the office that I worked at .
So I got out of school , I got a job , I got a paycheck , I got myself to the art store , and I just went nuts buying supplies .
And then when I got home , I sat down and I set myself to task to really try to create something just completely outside of the box .
But I sat there for hours , and nothing came to mind .
The same thing the next day , and then the next , quickly slipping into a creative slump .
And I was in a dark place for a long time , unable to create .
And it didnt make any sense , because I was finally able to support my art , and yet I was creatively blank .
But as I searched around in the darkness , I realized I was actually paralyzed by all of the choices that I never had before .
And it was then that I thought back to my jittery hands .
Embrace the shake .
And I realized , if I ever wanted my creativity back , I had to quit trying so hard to think outside of the box and get back into it .
I wondered , could you become more creative , then , by looking for limitations ?
What if I could only create with a dollars worth of supplies ?
At this point , I was spending a lot of my evenings in  -  -  well , I guess I still spend a lot of my evenings in Starbucks — but I know you can ask for an extra cup if you want one , so I decided to ask for 50 .
Surprisingly , they just handed them right over , and then with some pencils I already had , I made this project for only 80 cents .
It really became a moment of clarification for me that we need to first be limited in order to become limitless .
I took this approach of thinking inside the box to my canvas , and wondered what if , instead of painting on a canvas , I could only paint on my chest ?
So I painted 30 images , one layer at a time , one on top of another , with each picture representing an influence in my life .
Or what if , instead of painting with a brush , I could only paint with karate chops ?
So Id dip my hands in paint , and I just attacked the canvas , and I actually hit so hard that I bruised a joint in my pinkie and it was stuck straight for a couple of weeks .
Or , what if instead of relying on myself , I had to rely on other people to create the content for the art ?
So for six days , I lived in front of a webcam .
I slept on the floor and I ate takeout , and I asked people to call me and share a story with me about a life - changing moment .
Their stories became the art as I wrote them onto the revolving canvas .
Or what if instead of making art to display , I had to destroy it ?
This seemed like the ultimate limitation , being an artist without art .
This destruction idea turned into a yearlong project that I called Goodbye Art , where each and every piece of art had to be destroyed after its creation .
In the beginning of Goodbye Art , I focused on forced destruction , like this image of Jimi Hendrix , made with over 7,000 matches .
Then I opened it up to creating art that was destroyed naturally .
I looked for temporary materials , like spitting out food  -  -  — sidewalk chalk and even frozen wine .
The last iteration of destruction was to try to produce something that didnt actually exist in the first place .
So I organized candles on a table , I lit them , and then blew them out , then repeated this process over and over with the same set of candles , then assembled the videos into the larger image .
So the end image was never visible as a physical whole .
It was destroyed before it ever existed .
In the course of this Goodbye Art series , I created 23 different pieces with nothing left to physically display .
What I thought would be the ultimate limitation actually turned out to be the ultimate liberation , as each time I created , the destruction brought me back to a neutral place where I felt refreshed and ready to start the next project .
It did not happen overnight .
There were times when my projects failed to get off the ground , or , even worse , after spending tons of time on them the end image was kind of embarrassing .
But having committed to the process , I continued on , and something really surprising came out of this .
As I destroyed each project , I was learning to let go , let go of outcomes , let go of failures , and let go of imperfections .
And in return , I found a process of creating art thats perpetual and unencumbered by results .
I found myself in a state of constant creation , thinking only of whats next and coming up with more ideas than ever .
When I think back to my three years away from art , away from my dream , just going through the motions , instead of trying to find a different way to continue that dream , I just quit , I gave up .
And what if I didnt embrace the shake ?
Because embracing the shake for me wasnt just about art and having art skills .
It turned out to be about life , and having life skills .
Because ultimately , most of what we do takes place here , inside the box , with limited resources .
Learning to be creative within the confines of our limitations is the best hope we have to transform ourselves and , collectively , transform our world .
Looking at limitations as a source of creativity changed the course of my life .
Now , when I run into a barrier or I find myself creatively stumped , I sometimes still struggle , but I continue to show up for the process and try to remind myself of the possibilities , like using hundreds of real , live worms to make an image , using a pushpin to tattoo a banana , or painting a picture with hamburger grease .
One of my most recent endeavors is to try to translate the habits of creativity that Ive learned into something others can replicate .
Limitations may be the most unlikely of places to harness creativity , but perhaps one of the best ways to get ourselves out of ruts , rethink categories and challenge accepted norms .
And instead of telling each other to seize the day , maybe we can remind ourselves every day to seize the limitation .
Thank you .
Kelly McGonigal : How to make stress your friend
Stress . It makes your heart pound , your breathing quicken and your forehead sweat . But while stress has been made into a public health enemy , new research suggests that stress may only be bad for you if you believe that to be the case . Psychologist Kelly McGonigal urges us to see stress as a positive , and introduces us to an unsung mechanism for stress reduction : reaching out to others .
I have a confession to make , but first , I want you to make a little confession to me .
In the past year , I want you to just raise your hand if youve experienced relatively little stress .
Anyone ?
How about a moderate amount of stress ?
Who has experienced a lot of stress ?
Yeah . Me too .
But that is not my confession .
My confession is this : I am a health psychologist , and my mission is to help people be happier and healthier .
But I fear that something Ive been teaching for the last 10 years is doing more harm than good , and it has to do with stress .
For years Ive been telling people , stress makes you sick .
It increases the risk of everything from the common cold to cardiovascular disease .
Basically , Ive turned stress into the enemy .
But I have changed my mind about stress , and today , I want to change yours .
Let me start with the study that made me rethink my whole approach to stress .
This study tracked 30,000 adults in the United States for eight years , and they started by asking people ,  How much stress have you experienced in the last year ? 
They also asked ,  Do you believe that stress is harmful for your health ? 
And then they used public death records to find out who died .
Okay . Some bad news first .
People who experienced a lot of stress in the previous year had a 43 percent increased risk of dying .
But that was only true for the people who also believed that stress is harmful for your health .
People who experienced a lot of stress but did not view stress as harmful were no more likely to die .
In fact , they had the lowest risk of dying of anyone in the study , including people who had relatively little stress .
Now the researchers estimated that over the eight years they were tracking deaths , 182,000 Americans died prematurely , not from stress , but from the belief that stress is bad for you .
That is over 20,000 deaths a year .
Now , if that estimate is correct , that would make believing stress is bad for you the 15th largest cause of death in the United States last year , killing more people than skin cancer , HIV / AIDS and homicide .
You can see why this study freaked me out .
Here Ive been spending so much energy telling people stress is bad for your health .
So this study got me wondering : Can changing how you think about stress make you healthier ? And here the science says yes .
When you change your mind about stress , you can change your bodys response to stress .
Now to explain how this works , I want you all to pretend that you are participants in a study designed to stress you out .
Its called the social stress test .
You come into the laboratory , and youre told you have to give a five - minute impromptu speech on your personal weaknesses to a panel of expert evaluators sitting right in front of you , and to make sure you feel the pressure , there are bright lights and a camera in your face , kind of like this .
And the evaluators have been trained to give you discouraging , non - verbal feedback like this .
Now that youre sufficiently demoralized , time for part two : a math test .
And unbeknownst to you , the experimenter has been trained to harass you during it .
Now were going to all do this together .
Its going to be fun .
For me .
Okay . I want you all to count backwards from 996 in increments of seven .
as fast as you can , starting with 996 .
Go !
Audience : Go faster . Faster please .
Youre going too slow .
Stop . Stop , stop , stop .
That guy made a mistake .
We are going to have to start all over again .
Youre not very good at this , are you ?
Okay , so you get the idea .
Now , if you were actually in this study , youd probably be a little stressed out .
Your heart might be pounding , you might be breathing faster , maybe breaking out into a sweat .
And normally , we interpret these physical changes as anxiety or signs that we arent coping very well with the pressure .
But what if you viewed them instead as signs that your body was energized , was preparing you to meet this challenge ?
Now that is exactly what participants were told in a study conducted at Harvard University .
Before they went through the social stress test , they were taught to rethink their stress response as helpful .
That pounding heart is preparing you for action .
If youre breathing faster , its no problem .
Its getting more oxygen to your brain .
And participants who learned to view the stress response as helpful for their performance , well , they were less stressed out , less anxious , more confident , but the most fascinating finding to me was how their physical stress response changed .
Now , in a typical stress response , your heart rate goes up , and your blood vessels constrict like this .
And this is one of the reasons that chronic stress is sometimes associated with cardiovascular disease .
Its not really healthy to be in this state all the time .
But in the study , when participants viewed their stress response as helpful , their blood vessels stayed relaxed like this .
Their heart was still pounding , but this is a much healthier cardiovascular profile .
It actually looks a lot like what happens in moments of joy and courage .
Over a lifetime of stressful experiences , this one biological change could be the difference between a stress - induced heart attack at age 50 and living well into your 90s .
And this is really what the new science of stress reveals , that how you think about stress matters .
So my goal as a health psychologist has changed .
I no longer want to get rid of your stress .
I want to make you better at stress .
And we just did a little intervention .
If you raised your hand and said youd had a lot of stress in the last year , we could have saved your life , because hopefully the next time your heart is pounding from stress , youre going to remember this talk and youre going to think to yourself , this is my body helping me rise to this challenge .
And when you view stress in that way , your body believes you , and your stress response becomes healthier .
Now I said I have over a decade of demonizing stress to redeem myself from , so we are going to do one more intervention .
I want to tell you about one of the most under - appreciated aspects of the stress response , and the idea is this : Stress makes you social .
To understand this side of stress , we need to talk about a hormone , oxytocin , and I know oxytocin has already gotten as much hype as a hormone can get .
It even has its own cute nickname , the cuddle hormone , because its released when you hug someone .
But this is a very small part of what oxytocin is involved in .
Oxytocin is a neuro - hormone .
It fine - tunes your brains social instincts .
It primes you to do things that strengthen close relationships .
Oxytocin makes you crave physical contact with your friends and family .
It enhances your empathy .
It even makes you more willing to help and support the people you care about .
Some people have even suggested we should snort oxytocin to become more compassionate and caring .
But heres what most people dont understand about oxytocin .
Its a stress hormone .
Your pituitary gland pumps this stuff out as part of the stress response .
Its as much a part of your stress response as the adrenaline that makes your heart pound .
And when oxytocin is released in the stress response , it is motivating you to seek support .
Your biological stress response is nudging you to tell someone how you feel instead of bottling it up .
Your stress response wants to make sure you notice when someone else in your life is struggling so that you can support each other .
When life is difficult , your stress response wants you to be surrounded by people who care about you .
Okay , so how is knowing this side of stress going to make you healthier ?
Well , oxytocin doesnt only act on your brain .
It also acts on your body , and one of its main roles in your body is to protect your cardiovascular system from the effects of stress .
Its a natural anti - inflammatory .
It also helps your blood vessels stay relaxed during stress .
But my favorite effect on the body is actually on the heart .
Your heart has receptors for this hormone , and oxytocin helps heart cells regenerate and heal from any stress - induced damage .
This stress hormone strengthens your heart , and the cool thing is that all of these physical benefits of oxytocin are enhanced by social contact and social support , so when you reach out to others under stress , either to seek support or to help someone else , you release more of this hormone , your stress response becomes healthier , and you actually recover faster from stress .
I find this amazing , that your stress response has a built - in mechanism for stress resilience , and that mechanism is human connection .
I want to finish by telling you about one more study .
And listen up , because this study could also save a life .
This study tracked about 1,000 adults in the United States , and they ranged in age from 34 to 93 , and they started the study by asking ,  How much stress have you experienced in the last year ? 
They also asked ,  How much time have you spent helping out friends , neighbors , people in your community ? 
And then they used public records for the next five years to find out who died .
Okay , so the bad news first : For every major stressful life experience , like financial difficulties or family crisis , that increased the risk of dying by 30 percent .
But  -  -  and I hope you are expecting a but by now  -  -  but that wasnt true for everyone .
People who spent time caring for others showed absolutely no stress - related increase in dying . Zero .
Caring created resilience .
And so we see once again that the harmful effects of stress on your health are not inevitable .
How you think and how you act can transform your experience of stress .
When you choose to view your stress response as helpful , you create the biology of courage .
And when you choose to connect with others under stress , you can create resilience .
Now I wouldnt necessarily ask for more stressful experiences in my life , but this science has given me a whole new appreciation for stress .
Stress gives us access to our hearts .
The compassionate heart that finds joy and meaning in connecting with others , and yes , your pounding physical heart , working so hard to give you strength and energy , and when you choose to view stress in this way , youre not just getting better at stress , youre actually making a pretty profound statement .
Youre saying that you can trust yourself to handle lifes challenges , and youre remembering that you dont have to face them alone .
Thank you .
This is kind of amazing , what youre telling us .
It seems amazing to me that a belief about stress can make so much difference to someones life expectancy .
How would that extend to advice , like , if someone is making a lifestyle choice between , say , a stressful job and a non - stressful job , does it matter which way they go ?
Its equally wise to go for the stressful job so long as you believe that you can handle it , in some sense ?
Kelly McGonigal : Yeah , and one thing we know for certain is that chasing meaning is better for your health than trying to avoid discomfort .
And so I would say thats really the best way to make decisions , is go after what it is that creates meaning in your life and then trust yourself to handle the stress that follows .
Thank you so much , Kelly . Its pretty cool . KM : Thank you .
Rory Sutherland : Perspective is everything
The circumstances of our lives may matter less than how we see them , says Rory Sutherland . At TEDxAthens , he makes a compelling case for how reframing is the key to happiness . 
What you have here is an electronic cigarette .
Its something thats , since it was invented a year or two ago , has given me untold happiness .
A little bit of it , I think , is the nicotine , but theres something much bigger than that .
Which is ever since , in the U.K . , they banned smoking in public places , Ive never enjoyed a drinks party ever again .
And the reason , I only worked out just the other day , which is when you go to a drinks party and you stand up and you hold a glass of red wine and you talk endlessly to people , you dont actually want to spend all the time talking .
Its really , really tiring .
Sometimes you just want to stand there silently , alone with your thoughts .
Sometimes you just want to stand in the corner and stare out of the window .
Now the problem is , when you cant smoke , if you stand and stare out of the window on your own , youre an antisocial , friendless idiot .
If you stand and stare out of the window on your own with a cigarette , youre a fucking philosopher .
So the power of reframing things can not be overstated .
What we have is exactly the same thing , the same activity , but one of them makes you feel great and the other one , with just a small change of posture , makes you feel terrible .
And I think one of the problems with classical economics is its absolutely preoccupied with reality .
And reality isnt a particularly good guide to human happiness .
Why , for example , are pensioners much happier than the young unemployed ?
Both of them , after all , are in exactly the same stage of life .
You both have too much time on your hands and not much money .
But pensioners are reportedly very , very happy , whereas the unemployed are extraordinarily unhappy and depressed .
The reason , I think , is that the pensioners believe theyve chosen to be pensioners , whereas the young unemployed feel its been thrust upon them .
In England the upper middle classes have actually solved this problem perfectly , because theyve re - branded unemployment .
If youre an upper - middle - class English person , you call unemployment  a year off . 
And thats because having a son whos unemployed in Manchester is really quite embarrassing , but having a son whos unemployed in Thailand is really viewed as quite an accomplishment .
But actually the power to re - brand things  -  -  to understand that actually our experiences , costs , things dont actually much depend on what they really are , but on how we view them  -  -  I genuinely think cant be overstated .
Theres an experiment I think Daniel Pink refers to where you put two dogs in a box and the box has an electric floor .
Every now and then an electric shock is applied to the floor , which pains the dogs .
The only difference is one of the dogs has a small button in its half of the box .
And when it nuzzles the button , the electric shock stops .
The other dog doesnt have the button .
Its exposed to exactly the same level of pain as the dog in the first box , but it has no control over the circumstances .
Generally the first dog can be relatively content .
The second dog lapses into complete depression .
The circumstances of our lives may actually matter less to our happiness than the sense of control we feel over our lives .
Its an interesting question .
We ask the question  -  -  the whole debate in the Western world is about the level of taxation .
But I think theres another debate to be asked , which is the level of control we have over our tax money .
That what costs us 10 pounds in one context can be a curse .
What costs us 10 pounds in a different context we may actually welcome .
You know , pay 20,000 pounds in tax toward health and youre merely feeling a mug .
Pay 20,000 pounds to endow a hospital ward and youre called a philanthropist .
Im probably in the wrong country to talk about willingness to pay tax .
So Ill give you one in return . How you frame things really matters .
Do you call it the bailout of Greece or the bailout of a load of stupid banks which lent to Greece ?
Because they are actually the same thing .
What you call them actually affects how you react to them , viscerally and morally .
I think psychological value is great to be absolutely honest .
One of my great friends , a professor called Nick Chater , whos the Professor of Decision Sciences in London , believes that we should spend far less time looking into humanitys hidden depths and spend much more time exploring the hidden shallows .
I think thats true actually .
I think impressions have an insane effect on what we think and what we do .
But what we dont have is a really good model of human psychology .
At least pre - Kahneman perhaps , we didnt have a really good model of human psychology to put alongside models of engineering , of neoclassical economics .
So people who believed in psychological solutions didnt have a model .
We didnt have a framework .
This is what Warren Buffetts business partner Charlie Munger calls  a latticework on which to hang your ideas . 
Engineers , economists , classical economists all had a very , very robust existing latticework on which practically every idea could be hung .
We merely have a collection of random individual insights without an overall model .
And what that means is that in looking at solutions , weve probably given too much priority to what I call technical engineering solutions , Newtonian solutions , and not nearly enough to the psychological ones .
You know my example of the Eurostar .
Six million pounds spent to reduce the journey time between Paris and London by about 40 minutes .
For 0.01 percent of this money you could have put WiFi on the trains , which wouldnt have reduced the duration of the journey , but would have improved its enjoyment and its usefullness far more .
For maybe 10 percent of the money , you could have paid all of the worlds top male and female supermodels to walk up and down the train handing out free Chateau Petrus to all the passengers .
Youd still have five  million  pounds in change , and people would ask for the trains to be slowed down .
Why were we not given the chance to solve that problem psychologically ?
I think its because theres an imbalance , an asymmetry , in the way we treat creative , emotionally - driven psychological ideas versus the way we treat rational , numerical , spreadsheet - driven ideas .
If youre a creative person , I think quite rightly , you have to share all your ideas for approval with people much more rational than you .
You have to go in and you have to have a cost - benefit analysis , a feasibility study , an ROI study and so forth .
And I think thats probably right .
But this does not apply the other way around .
People who have an existing framework , an economic framework , an engineering framework , feel that actually logic is its own answer .
What they dont say is ,  Well the numbers all seem to add up , but before I present this idea , Ill go and show it to some really crazy people to see if they can come up with something better . 
And so we , artificially I think , prioritize what Id call mechanistic ideas over psychological ideas .
An example of a great psychological idea : The single best improvement in passenger satisfaction on the London Underground per pound spent came when they didnt add any extra trains nor change the frequency of the trains , they put dot matrix display board on the platforms .
Because the nature of a wait is not just dependent on its numerical quality , its duration , but on the level of uncertainty you experience during that wait .
Waiting seven minutes for a train with a countdown clock is less frustrating and irritating than waiting four minutes , knuckle - biting going ,  Whens this train going to damn well arrive ? 
Heres a beautiful example of a psychological solution deployed in Korea .
Red traffic lights have a countdown delay .
Its proven to reduce the accident rate in experiments .
Why ? Because road rage , impatience and general irritation are massively reduced when you can actually see the time you have to wait .
In China , not really understanding the principle behind this , they applied the same principle to green traffic lights .
Which isnt a great idea .
Youre 200 yards away , you realize youve got five seconds to go , you floor it .
The Koreans , very assiduously , did test both .
The accident rate goes down when you apply this to red traffic lights ; it goes up when you apply it to green traffic lights .
This is all Im asking for really in human decision making , is the consideration of these three things .
Im not asking for the complete primacy of one over the other .
Im merely saying that when you solve problems , you should look at all three of these equally and you should seek as far as possible to find solutions which sit in the sweet spot in the middle .
If you actually look at a great business , youll nearly always see all of these three things coming into play .
Really , really successful businesses  -  -  Google is great , great technological success , but its also based on a very good psychological insight : People believe something that only does one thing is better at that thing than something that does that thing and something else .
Its an innate thing called goal dilution .
Ayelet Fishbach has written a paper about this .
Everybody else at the time of Google , more or less , was trying to be a portal .
Yes , theres a search function , but you also have weather , sports scores , bits of news .
Google understood that if youre just a search engine , people assume youre a very , very good search engine .
All of you know this actually from when you go in to buy a television .
And in the shabbier end of the row of flat screen TVs you can see are these rather despised things called combined TV and DVD players .
And we have no knowledge whatsoever of the quality of those things , but we look at a combined TV and DVD player and we go ,  Uck .
Its probably a bit of a crap telly and a bit rubbish as a DVD player . 
So we walk out of the shops with one of each .
Google is as much a psychological success as it is a technological one .
I propose that we can use psychology to solve problems that we didnt even realize were problems at all .
This is my suggestion for getting people to finish their course of antibiotics .
Dont give them 24 white pills .
Give them 18 white pills and six blue ones and tell them to take the white pills first and then take the blue ones .
Its called chunking .
The likelihood that people will get to the end is much greater when there is a milestone somewhere in the middle .
One of the great mistakes , I think , of economics is it fails to understand that what something is , whether its retirement , unemployment , cost , is a function , not only of its amount , but also its meaning .
This is a toll crossing in Britain .
Quite often queues happen at the tolls .
Sometimes you get very , very severe queues .
You could apply the same principle actually , if you like , to the security lanes in airports .
What would happen if you could actually pay twice as much money to cross the bridge , but go through a lane thats an express lane ?
Its not an unreasonable thing to do . Its an economically efficient thing to do .
Time means more to some people than others .
If youre waiting trying to get to a job interview , youd patently pay a couple of pounds more to go through the fast lane .
If youre on the way to visit your mother in - law , youd probably prefer to stay on the left .
The only problem is if you introduce this economically efficient solution , people hate it .
Because they think youre deliberately creating delays at the bridge in order to maximize your revenue , and  Why on earth should I pay to subsidize your imcompetence ? 
On the other hand , change the frame slightly and create charitable yield management , so the extra money you get goes not to the bridge company , it goes to charity , and the mental willingness to pay completely changes .
You have a relatively economically efficient solution , but one that actually meets with public approval and even a small degree of affection , rather than being seen as bastardy .
So where economists make the fundamental mistake is they think that money is money .
Actually my pain experienced in paying five pounds is not just proportionate to the amount , but where I think that money is going .
And I think understanding that could revolutionize tax policy .
It could revolutionize the public services .
It could really change things quite significantly .
Heres a guy you all need to study .
Hes an Austrian school economist who was first active in the first half of the 20th century in Vienna .
What was interesting about the Austrian school is they actually grew up alongside Freud .
And so theyre predominantly interested in psychology .
They believed that there was a discipline called praxeology , which is a prior discipline to the study of economics .
Praxeology is the study of human choice , action and decision making .
I think theyre right .
I think the danger we have in todays world is we have the study of economics considers itself to be a prior discipline to the study of human psychology .
But as Charlie Munger says ,  If economics isnt behavioral , I dont know what the hell is . 
Von Mises , interestingly , believes economics is just a subset of psychology .
I think he just refers to economics as  the study of human praxeology under conditions of scarcity . 
But von Mises , among many other things , I think uses an analogy which is probably the best justification and explanation for the value of marketing , the value of perceived value and the fact that we should actually treat it as being absolutely equivalent to any other kind of value .
We tend to , all of us  -  -  even those of us who work in marketing  -  -  to think of value in two ways .
Theres the real value , which is when you make something in a factory and provide a service , and then theres a kind of dubious value , which you create by changing the way people look at things .
Von Mises completely rejected this distinction .
And he used this following analogy .
He referred actually to strange economists called the French Physiocrats , who believed that the only true value was what you extracted from the land .
So if youre a shepherd or a quarryman or a farmer , you created true value .
If however , you bought some wool from the shepherd and charged a premium for converting it into a hat , you werent actually creating value , you were exploiting the shepherd .
Now von Mises said that modern economists make exactly the same mistake with regard to advertising and marketing .
He says , if you run a restaurant , there is no healthy distinction to be made between the value you create by cooking the food and the value you create by sweeping the floor .
One of them creates , perhaps , the primary product  -  -  the thing we think were paying for  -  -  the other one creates a context within which we can enjoy and appreciate that product .
And the idea that one of them should actually have priority over the other is fundamentally wrong .
Try this quick thought experiment .
Imagine a restaurant that serves Michelin - starred food , but actually where the restaurant smells of sewage and theres human feces on the floor .
The best thing you can do there to create value is not actually to improve the food still further , its to get rid of the smell and clean up the floor .
And its vital we understand this .
If that seems like some strange , abstruse thing , in the U.K . , the post office had a 98 percent success rate at delivering first - class mail the next day .
They decided this wasnt good enough and they wanted to get it up to 99 .
The effort to do that almost broke the organization .
If at the same time youd gone and asked people ,  What percentage of first - class mail arrives the next day ? 
the average answer , or the modal answer would have been 50 to 60 percent .
Now if your perception is much worse than your reality , what on earth are you doing trying to change the reality ?
Thats like trying to improve the food in a restaurant that stinks .
What you need to do is first of all tell people that 98 percent of mail gets there the next day , first - class mail .
Thats pretty good .
I would argue , in Britain theres a much better frame of reference , which is to tell people that more first - class mail arrives the next day in the U.K . than in Germany .
Because generally in Britain if you want to make us happy about something , just tell us we do it better than the Germans .
Choose your frame of reference and the perceived value and therefore the actual value is completely tranformed .
It has to be said of the Germans that the Germans and the French are doing a brilliant job of creating a united Europe .
The only thing they dont expect is theyre uniting Europe through a shared mild hatred of the French and Germans .
But Im British , thats the way we like it .
What you also notice is that in any case our perception is leaky .
We cant tell the difference between the quality of the food and the environment in which we consume it .
All of you will have seen this phenomenon if you have your car washed or valeted .
When you drive away , your car feels as if it drives better .
And the reason for this , unless my car valet mysteriously is changing the oil and performing work which Im not paying him for and Im unaware of , is because perception is in any case leaky .
Analgesics that are branded are more effective at reducing pain than analgesics that are not branded .
I dont just mean through reported pain reduction , actual measured pain reduction .
And so perception actually is leaky in any case .
So if you do something thats perceptually bad in one respect , you can damage the other .
Thank you very much .
Elif Shafak : The politics of fiction
Listening to stories widens the imagination ; telling them lets us leap over cultural walls , embrace different experiences , feel what others feel . Elif Shafak builds on this simple idea to argue that fiction can overcome identity politics .
Im a storyteller .
Thats what I do in life  -  -  telling stories , writing novels  -  -  and today I would like to tell you a few stories about the art of storytelling and also some supernatural creatures called the djinni .
But before I go there , please allow me to share with you glimpses of my personal story .
I will do so with the help of words , of course , but also a geometrical shape , the circle , so throughout my talk , you will come across several circles .
I was born in Strasbourg , France to Turkish parents .
Shortly after , my parents got separated , and I came to Turkey with my mom .
From then on , I was raised as a single child by a single mother .
Now in the early 1970s , in Ankara , that was a bit unusual .
Our neighborhood was full of large families , where fathers were the heads of households , so I grew up seeing my mother as a divorcee in a patriarchal environment .
In fact , I grew up observing two different kinds of womanhood .
On the one hand was my mother , a well - educated , secular , modern , westernized , Turkish woman .
On the other hand was my grandmother , who also took care of me and was more spiritual , less educated and definitely less rational .
This was a woman who read coffee grounds to see the future and melted lead into mysterious shapes to fend off the evil eye .
Many people visited my grandmother , people with severe acne on their faces or warts on their hands .
Each time , my grandmother would utter some words in Arabic , take a red apple and stab it with as many rose thorns as the number of warts she wanted to remove .
Then one by one , she would encircle these thorns with dark ink .
A week later , the patient would come back for a follow - up examination .
Now , Im aware that I should not be saying such things in front of an audience of scholars and scientists , but the truth is , of all the people who visited my grandmother for their skin conditions , I did not see anyone go back unhappy or unhealed .
I asked her how she did this . Was it the power of praying ?
In response she said ,  Yes , praying is effective , but also beware of the power of circles . 
From her , I learned , amongst many other things , one very precious lesson  -  -  that if you want to destroy something in this life , be it an acne , a blemish or the human soul , all you need to do is to surround it with thick walls .
It will dry up inside .
Now we all live in some kind of a social and cultural circle .
We all do .
Were born into a certain family , nation , class .
But if we have no connection whatsoever with the worlds beyond the one we take for granted , then we too run the risk of drying up inside .
Our imagination might shrink ; our hearts might dwindle , and our humanness might wither if we stay for too long inside our cultural cocoons .
Our friends , neighbors , colleagues , family  -  -  if all the people in our inner circle resemble us , it means we are surrounded with our mirror image .
Now one other thing women like my grandma do in Turkey is to cover mirrors with velvet or to hang them on the walls with their backs facing out .
Its an old Eastern tradition based on the knowledge that its not healthy for a human being to spend too much time staring at his own reflection .
Ironically ,  living in  communities of the like - minded is one of the greatest dangers of todays globalized world .
And its happening everywhere , among liberals and conservatives , agnostics and believers , the rich and the poor , East and West alike .
We tend to form clusters based on similarity , and then we produce stereotypes about other clusters of people .
In my opinion , one way of transcending these cultural ghettos is through the art of storytelling .
Stories can not demolish frontiers , but they can punch holes in our mental walls .
And through those holes , we can get a glimpse of the other , and sometimes even like what we see .
I started writing fiction at the age of eight .
My mother came home one day with a turquoise notebook and asked me if Id be interested in keeping a personal journal .
In retrospect , I think she was slightly worried about my sanity .
I was constantly telling stories at home , which was good , except I told this to imaginary friends around me , which was not so good .
I was an introverted child , to the point of communicating with colored crayons and apologizing to objects when I bumped into them , so my mother thought it might do me good to write down my day - to - day experiences and emotions .
What she didnt know was that I thought my life was terribly boring , and the last thing I wanted to do was to write about myself .
Instead , I began to write about people other than me and things that never really happened .
And thus began my life - long passion for writing fiction .
So from the very beginning , fiction for me was less of an autobiographical manifestation than a transcendental journey into other lives , other possibilities .
And please bear with me : Ill draw a circle and come back to this point .
Now one other thing happened around this same time .
My mother became a diplomat .
So from this small , superstitious , middle - class neighborhood of my grandmother , I was zoomed into this posh , international school  in Madrid  , where I was the only Turk .
It was here that I had my first encounter with what I call the  representative foreigner . 
In our classroom , there were children from all nationalities , yet this diversity did not necessarily lead to a cosmopolitan , egalitarian classroom democracy .
Instead , it generated an atmosphere in which each child was seen  -  -  not as an individual on his own , but as the representative of something larger .
We were like a miniature United Nations , which was fun , except whenever something negative , with regards to a nation or a religion , took place .
The child who represented it was mocked , ridiculed and bullied endlessly .
And I should know , because during the time I attended that school , a military takeover happened in my country , a gunman of my nationality nearly killed the Pope , and Turkey got zero points in  the  Eurovision Song Contest .
I skipped school often and dreamed of becoming a sailor during those days .
I also had my first taste of cultural stereotypes there .
The other children asked me about the movie  Midnight Express ,  which I had not seen ; they inquired how many cigarettes a day I smoked , because they thought all Turks were heavy smokers , and they wondered at what age I would start covering my hair .
I came to learn that these were the three main stereotypes about my country : politics , cigarettes and the veil .
After Spain , we went to Jordan , Germany and Ankara again .
Everywhere I went , I felt like my imagination was the only suitcase I could take with me .
Stories gave me a sense of center , continuity and coherence , the three big Cs that I otherwise lacked .
In my mid - twenties , I moved to Istanbul , the city I adore .
I lived in a very vibrant , diverse neighborhood where I wrote several of my novels .
I was in Istanbul when the earthquake hit in 1999 .
When I ran out of the building at three in the morning , I saw something that stopped me in my tracks .
There was the local grocer there  -  -  a grumpy , old man who didnt sell alcohol and didnt speak to marginals .
He was sitting next to a transvestite with a long black wig and mascara running down her cheeks .
I watched the man open a pack of cigarettes with trembling hands and offer one to her , and that is the image of the night of the earthquake in my mind today  -  -  a conservative grocer and a crying transvestite smoking together on the sidewalk .
In the face of death and destruction , our mundane differences evaporated , and we all became one even if for a few hours .
But Ive always believed that stories , too , have a similar effect on us .
Im not saying that fiction has the magnitude of an earthquake , but when we are reading a good novel , we leave our small , cozy apartments behind , go out into the night alone and start getting to know people we had never met before and perhaps had even been biased against .
Shortly after , I went to a womens college in Boston , then Michigan .
I experienced this , not so much as a geographical shift , as a linguistic one .
I started writing fiction in English .
Im not an immigrant , refugee or exile  -  -  they ask me why I do this  -  -  but the commute between languages gives me the chance to recreate myself .
I love writing in Turkish , which to me is very poetic and very emotional , and I love writing in English , which to me is very mathematical and cerebral .
So I feel connected to each language in a different way .
For me , like millions of other people around the world today , English is an acquired language .
When youre a latecomer to a language , what happens is you live there with a continuous and perpetual frustration .
As latecomers , we always want to say more , you know , crack better jokes , say better things , but we end up saying less because theres a gap between the mind and the tongue .
And that gap is very intimidating .
But if we manage not to be frightened by it , its also stimulating .
And this is what I discovered in Boston  -  -  that frustration was very stimulating .
At this stage , my grandmother , who had been watching the course of my life with increasing anxiety , started to include in her daily prayers that I urgently get married so that I could settle down once and for all .
And because God loves her , I did get married .
But instead of settling down , I went to Arizona .
And since my husband is in Istanbul , I started commuting between Arizona and Istanbul  -  -  the two places on the surface of earth that couldnt be more different .
I guess one part of me has always been a nomad , physically and spiritually .
Stories accompany me , keeping my pieces and memories together , like an existential glue .
Yet as much as I love stories , recently , Ive also begun to think that they lose their magic if and when a story is seen as more than a story .
And this is a subject that I would love to think about together .
When my first novel written in English came out in America , I heard an interesting remark from a literary critic .
 I liked your book ,  he said ,  but I wish you had written it differently . 
I asked him what he meant by that .
He said ,  Well , look at it . Theres so many Spanish , American , Hispanic characters in it , but theres only one Turkish character and its a man . 
Now the novel took place on a university campus in Boston , so to me , it was normal that there be more international characters in it than Turkish characters , but I understood what my critic was looking for .
And I also understood that I would keep disappointing him .
He wanted to see the manifestation of my identity .
He was looking for a Turkish woman in the book because I happened to be one .
We often talk about how stories change the world , but we should also see how the world of identity politics affects the way stories are being circulated , read and reviewed .
Many authors feel this pressure , but non - Western authors feel it more heavily .
If youre a woman writer from the Muslim world , like me , then you are expected to write the stories of Muslim women and , preferably , the unhappy stories of unhappy Muslim women .
Youre expected to write informative , poignant and characteristic stories and leave the experimental and avant - garde to your Western colleagues .
What I experienced as a child in that school in Madrid is happening in the literary world today .
Writers are not seen as creative individuals on their own , but as the representatives of their respective cultures : a few authors from China , a few from Turkey , a few from Nigeria .
Were all thought to have something very distinctive , if not peculiar .
The writer and commuter James Baldwin gave an interview in 1984 in which he was repeatedly asked about his homosexuality .
When the interviewer tried to pigeonhole him as a gay writer , Baldwin stopped and said ,  But dont you see ? Theres nothing in me that is not in everybody else , and nothing in everybody else that is not in me . 
When identity politics tries to put labels on us , it is our freedom of imagination that is in danger .
Theres a fuzzy category called multicultural literature in which all authors from outside the Western world are lumped together .
I never forget my first multicultural reading , in Harvard Square about 10 years ago .
We were three writers , one from the Philippines , one Turkish and one Indonesian  -  -  like a joke , you know .
And the reason why we were brought together was not because we shared an artistic style or a literary taste .
It was only because of our passports .
Multicultural writers are expected to tell real stories , not so much the imaginary .
A function is attributed to fiction .
In this way , not only the writers themselves , but also their fictional characters become the representatives of something larger .
But I must quickly add that this tendency to see a story as more than a story does not solely come from the West .
It comes from everywhere .
And I experienced this firsthand when I was put on trial in 2005 for the words my fictional characters uttered in a novel .
I had intended to write a constructive , multi - layered novel about an Armenian and a Turkish family through the eyes of women .
My micro story became a macro issue when I was prosecuted .
Some people criticized , others praised me for writing about the Turkish - Armenian conflict .
But there were times when I wanted to remind both sides that this was fiction .
It was just a story .
And when I say ,  just a story ,  Im not trying to belittle my work .
I want to love and celebrate fiction for what it is , not as a means to an end .
Writers are entitled to their political opinions , and there are good political novels out there , but the language of fiction is not the language of daily politics .
Chekhov said ,  The solution to a problem and the correct way of posing the question are two completely separate things .
And only the latter is an artists responsibility . 
Identity politics divides us . Fiction connects .
One is interested in sweeping generalizations .
The other , in nuances .
One draws boundaries .
The other recognizes no frontiers .
Identity politics is made of solid bricks .
Fiction is flowing water .
In the Ottoman times , there were itinerant storytellers called  meddah . 
They would go to coffee houses , where they would tell a story in front of an audience , often improvising .
With each new person in the story , the meddah would change his voice , impersonating that character .
Everybody could go and listen , you know  -  -  ordinary people , even the sultan , Muslims and non - Muslims .
Stories cut across all boundaries , like  The Tales of Nasreddin Hodja ,  which were very popular throughout the Middle East , North Africa , the Balkans and Asia .
Today , stories continue to transcend borders .
When Palestinian and Israeli politicians talk , they usually dont listen to each other , but a Palestinian reader still reads a novel by a Jewish author , and vice versa , connecting and empathizing with the narrator .
Literature has to take us beyond .
If it can not take us there , it is not good literature .
Books have saved the introverted , timid child that I was  -  -  that I once was .
But Im also aware of the danger of fetishizing them .
When the poet and mystic , Rumi , met his spiritual companion , Shams of Tabriz , one of the first things the latter did was to toss Rumis books into water and watch the letters dissolve .
The Sufis say ,  Knowledge that takes you not beyond yourself is far worse than ignorance . 
The problem with todays cultural ghettos is not lack of knowledge  -  -  we know a lot about each other , or so we think  -  -  but knowledge that takes us not beyond ourselves : it makes us elitist , distant and disconnected .
Theres a metaphor which I love : living like a drawing compass .
As you know , one leg of the compass is static , rooted in a place .
Meanwhile , the other leg draws a wide circle , constantly moving .
Like that , my fiction as well .
One part of it is rooted in Istanbul , with strong Turkish roots , but the other part travels the world , connecting to different cultures .
In that sense , I like to think of my fiction as both local and universal , both from here and everywhere .
Now those of you who have been to Istanbul have probably seen Topkapi Palace , which was the residence of Ottoman sultans for more than 400 years .
In the palace , just outside the quarters of the favorite concubines , theres an area called The Gathering Place of the Djinn .
Its between buildings .
Im intrigued by this concept .
We usually distrust those areas that fall in between things .
We see them as the domain of supernatural creatures like the djinn , who are made of smokeless fire and are the symbol of elusiveness .
But my point is perhaps that elusive space is what writers and artists need most .
When I write fiction I cherish elusiveness and changeability .
I like not knowing what will happen 10 pages later .
I like it when my characters surprise me .
I might write about a Muslim woman in one novel , and perhaps it will be a very happy story , and in my next book , I might write about a handsome , gay professor in Norway .
As long as it comes from our hearts , we can write about anything and everything .
Audre Lorde once said ,  The white fathers taught us to say , I think , therefore I am .  She suggested ,  I feel , therefore I am free . 
I think it was a wonderful paradigm shift .
And yet , why is it that , in creative writing courses today , the very first thing we teach students is  write what you know  ?
Perhaps thats not the right way to start at all .
Imaginative literature is not necessarily about writing who we are or what we know or what our identity is about .
We should teach young people and ourselves to expand our hearts and write what we can feel .
We should get out of our cultural ghetto and go visit the next one and the next .
In the end , stories move like whirling dervishes , drawing circles beyond circles .
They connect all humanity , regardless of identity politics , and that is the good news .
And I would like to finish with an old Sufi poem :  Come , let us be friends for once ; let us make life easy on us ; let us be lovers and loved ones ; the earth shall be left to no one . 
Thank you .
Naturally 7 : A full - band beatbox
One - of - a - kind R and B group Naturally 7 beatboxes an orchestras worth of instruments to groove through their smooth single ,  Fly Baby . 
I think Im ready to do my thing I think Im ready to take my chances Ive been dining out and all stressed out Due to the circumstances . See ? I gotta get up , get up , get up , get up Wake up , wake up , wake up , wake up I see what youre saying We sent a demo to the world , they said it sounds like Take 6 I said  Hold on , wait a minute , Ill be back with the remix  They looking at us funny , we cant make any money It took us years to figure out that we was dealing with dummies They didnt understand the sound from the Bronx , thats the boogie down to Huntsville , Alabama , theres no circles in my planner , so It was time to make the product , so we hooked up with Townsend Made a deal with John Neal , on the road sold ten thousand WBA , that means a trip to Nashville Festplatte showed up and said them boys are naturals Can you hear what they were hearing ? See what they were seeing ? From Bronx to Berlin , we took the tour European All vocal yeah , we widit , call the album  What is it ?  With Sarah Connor , set the goal for number one and we hit it But now its Kev , Sim , Drew , Stew , time for a new day Ring the alarm , hit em on Skype or a two - way Sung by the words , we ready to fly ! Fly baby ! Time to leave that nest Fly baby ! This aint no time to rest Come on fly baby , we got work to do Here we go , spread my wings and ... Fly baby ! Time to leave that nest Fly baby ! This aint no time to rest . Come on Fly baby ! We got work to do Here we go . Spread my wings and fly . One more time Fly baby ! Time to leave that nest Fly baby ! This aint no time to rest Fly baby ! We got work to do Here we go , spread my wings and ... Fly baby ! Fly baby fly Fly baby ! Fly baby high Fly baby ! Up to the sky Spread my wings and fly Instrumental !
Were ready to fly ! Thank you very much .
Chris Bliss : Comedy is translation
Every act of communication is , in some way , an act of translation . Onstage at TEDxRainier , writer Chris Bliss thinks hard about the way that great comedy can translate deep truths for a mass audience . 
Gabriel García Márquez is one of my favorite writers , for his storytelling , but even more , I think , for the beauty and precision of his prose .
And whether its the opening line from  One Hundred Years of Solitude  or the fantastical stream of consciousness in  Autumn of the Patriarch ,  where the words rush by , page after page of unpunctuated imagery sweeping the reader along like some wild river twisting through a primal South American jungle , reading Márquez is a visceral experience .
Which struck me as particularly remarkable during one session with the novel when I realized that I was being swept along on this remarkable , vivid journey in translation .
Now I was a comparative literature major in college , which is like an English major , only instead of being stuck studying Chaucer for three months , we got to read great literature in translation from around the world .
And as great as these books were , you could always tell that you were getting close to the full effect .
But not so with Márquez who once praised his translators versions as being better than his own , which is an astonishing compliment .
So when I heard that the translator , Gregory Rabassa , had written his own book on the subject , I couldnt wait to read it .
Its called apropos of the Italian adage that I lifted from his forward ,  If This Be Treason . 
And its a charming read .
Its highly recommended for anyone whos interested in the translators art .
But the reason that I mention it is that early on , Rabassa offers this elegantly simple insight :  Every act of communication is an act of translation . 
Now maybe thats been obvious to all of you for a long time , but for me , as often as Id encountered that exact difficulty on a daily basis , I had never seen the inherent challenge of communication in so crystalline a light .
Ever since I can remember thinking consciously about such things , communication has been my central passion .
Even as a child , I remember thinking that what I really wanted most in life was to be able to understand everything and then to communicate it to everyone else .
So no ego problems .
Its funny , my wife , Daisy , whose family is littered with schizophrenics  -  -  and I mean littered with them  -  -  once said to me ,  Chris , I already have a brother who thinks hes God .
I dont need a husband who wants to be . 
Anyway , as I plunged through my 20s ever more aware of how unobtainable the first part of my childhood ambition was , it was that second part , being able to successfully communicate to others whatever knowledge I was gaining , where the futility of my quest really set in .
Time after time , whenever I set out to share some great truth with a soon - to - be grateful recipient , it had the opposite effect .
Interestingly , when your opening line of communication is ,  Hey , listen up , because Im about to drop some serious knowledge on you ,  its amazing how quickly youll discover both ice and the firing squad .
Finally , after about 10 years of alienating friends and strangers alike , I finally got it , a new personal truth all my own , that if I was going to ever communicate well with other people the ideas that I was gaining , Id better find a different way of going about it .
And thats when I discovered comedy .
Now comedy travels along a distinct wavelength from other forms of language .
If I had to place it on an arbitrary spectrum , Id say it falls somewhere between poetry and lies .
And Im not talking about all comedy here , because , clearly , theres plenty of humor that colors safely within the lines of what we already think and feel .
What I want to talk about is the unique ability that the best comedy and satire has at circumventing our ingrained perspectives  -  -  comedy as the philosophers stone .
It takes the base metal of our conventional wisdom and transforms it through ridicule into a different way of seeing and ultimately being in the world .
Because thats what I take from the theme of this conference : Gained in Translation .
That its about communication that doesnt just produce greater understanding within the individual , but leads to real change .
Which in my experience means communication that manages to speak to and expand our concept of self - interest .
Now Im big on speaking to peoples self - interest because were all wired for that .
Its part of our survival package , and thats why its become so important for us , and thats why were always listening at that level .
And also because thats where , in terms of our own self - interest , we finally begin to grasp our ability to respond , our responsibility to the rest of the world .
Now as to what I mean by the best comedy and satire , I mean work that comes first and foremost from a place of honesty and integrity .
Now if you think back on Tina Feys impersonations on Saturday Night Live of the newly nominated vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin , they were devastating .
Fey demonstrated far more effectively than any political pundit the candidates fundamental lack of seriousness , cementing an impression that the majority of the American public still holds today .
And the key detail of this is that Feys scripts werent written by her and they werent written by the SNL writers .
They were lifted verbatim from Palins own remarks .
Here was a Palin impersonator quoting Palin word for word .
Now thats honesty and integrity , and its also why Feys performances left such a lasting impression .
On the other side of the political spectrum , the first time that I heard Rush Limbaugh refer to presidential hopeful John Edwards as the Breck girl I knew that hed made a direct hit .
Now its not often that Im going to associate the words honesty and integrity with Limbaugh , but its really hard to argue with that punchline .
The description perfectly captured Edwards personal vanity .
And guess what ?
That ended up being the exact personality trait that was at the core of the scandal that ended his political career .
Now The Daily Show with John Stewart is by far the most  -  -  its by far the most well - documented example of the effectiveness of this kind of comedy .
Survey after survey , from Pew Research to the Annenberg Center for Public Policy , has found that Daily Show viewers are better informed about current events than the viewers of all major network and cable news shows .
Now whether this says more about the conflict between integrity and profitability of corporate journalism than it does about the attentiveness of Stewarts viewers , the larger point remains that Stewarts material is always grounded in a commitment to the facts  -  -  not because his intent is to inform . Its not .
His intent is to be funny .
It just so happens that Stewarts brand of funny doesnt work unless the facts are true .
And the result is great comedy thats also an information delivery system that scores markedly higher in both credibility and retention than the professional news media .
Now this is doubly ironic when you consider that what gives comedy its edge at reaching around peoples walls is the way that it uses deliberate misdirection .
A great piece of comedy is a verbal magic trick , where you think its going over here and then all of a sudden youre transported over here .
And theres this mental delight thats followed by the physical response of laughter , which , not coincidentally , releases endorphins in the brain .
And just like that , youve been seduced into a different way of looking at something because the endorphins have brought down your defenses .
This is the exact opposite of the way that anger and fear and panic , all of the flight - or - fight responses , operate .
Flight - or - fight releases adrenalin , which throws our walls up sky - high .
And the comedy comes along , dealing with a lot of the same areas where our defenses are the strongest  -  -  race , religion , politics , sexuality  -  -  only by approaching them through humor instead of adrenalin , we get endorphins and the alchemy of laughter turns our walls into windows , revealing a fresh and unexpected point of view .
Now let me give you an example from my act .
I have some material about the so - called radical gay agenda , which starts off by asking , how radical is the gay agenda ?
Because from what I can tell , the three things gay Americans seem to want most are to join the military , get married and start a family .
Three things Ive tried to avoid my entire life .
Have at it you radical bastards . The field is yours .
And thats followed by these lines about gay adoption : What is the problem with gay adoption ?
Why is this remotely controversial ?
If you have a baby and you think that babys gay , you should be allowed to put it up for adoption .
You have given birth to an abomination .
Remove it from your household .
Now by taking the biblical epithet  abomination  and attaching it to the ultimate image of innocence , a baby , this joke short circuits the emotional wiring behind the debate and it leaves the audience with the opportunity , through their laughter , to question its validity .
Misdirection isnt the only trick that comedy has up its sleeve .
Economy of language is another real strong suit of great comedy .
There are few phrases that pack a more concentrated dose of subject and symbol than the perfect punchline .
Bill Hicks  -  -  and if you dont know his work , you should really Google him  -  -  Hicks had a routine about getting into one of those childhood bragging contests on the playground , where finally the other kid says to him ,  Huh ? Well my dad can beat up your dad ,  to which Hicks replies ,  Really ? How soon ? 
Thats an entire childhood in three words .
Not to mention what it reveals about the adult whos speaking them .
And one last powerful attribute that comedy has as communication is that its inherently viral .
People cant wait to pass along that new great joke .
And this isnt some new phenomenon of our wired world .
Comedy has been crossing country with remarkable speed way before the Internet , social media , even cable TV .
Back in 1980 when comedian Richard Pryor accidentally set himself on fire during a freebasing accident , I was in Los Angeles the day after it happened and then I was in Washington D.C . two days after that .
And I heard the exact same punchline on both coasts  -  -  something about the Ignited Negro College Fund .
Clearly , it didnt come out of a Tonight Show monologue .
And my guess here  -  -  and I have no research on this  -  -  is that if you really were to look back at it and if you could research it , youd find out that comedy is the second oldest viral profession .
First there were drums and then knock - knock jokes .
But its when you put all of these elements together  -  -  when you get the viral appeal of a great joke with a powerful punchline thats crafted from honesty and integrity , it can have a real world impact at changing a conversation .
Now I have a close friend , Joel Pett , whos the editorial cartoonist for the Lexington Herald - Leader .
And he used to be the USA Today Monday morning guy .
I was visiting with Joel the weekend before the Copenhagen conference on climate change opened in December of 2009 .
And Joel was explaining to me that , because USA Today was one of Americas four papers of record , it would be scanned by virtually everyone in attendance at the conference , which meant that , if he hit it out of the park with his cartoon on Monday , the opening day of the conference , it could get passed around at the highest level among actual decision - makers .
So we started talking about climate change .
And it turned out that Joel and I were both bothered by the same thing , which was how so much of the debate was still focused on the science and how complete it was or wasnt , which , to both of us , seems somewhat intentionally off point .
Because first of all , theres this false premise that such a thing as complete science exists .
Now Governor Perry of my newly - adopted state of Texas was pushing this same line this past summer at the beginning of his oops - fated campaign for the Republican presidential nomination , proclaiming over and over that the science wasnt complete out of 254 counties in the state of Texas were on fire .
And Perrys policy solution was to ask the people of Texas to pray for rain .
Personally , I was praying for four more fires so we could finally complete the damn science .
But back in 2009 , the question Joel and I kept turning over and over was why this late in the game so much energy was being spent talking about the science when the policies necessary to address climate change were unequivocally beneficial for humanity in the long run regardless of the science .
So we tossed it back and forth until Joel came up with this .
Cartoon :  What if its a big hoax and we create a better world for nothing ? 
Youve got to love that idea .
How about that ? How about we create a better world for nothing ?
Not for God , not for country , not for profit  -  -  just as a basic metric for global decision - making .
And this cartoon hit the bulls eye .
Shortly after the conference was over , Joel got a request for a signed copy from the head of the EPA in Washington whose wall it now hangs on .
And not long after that , he got another request for a copy from the head of the EPA in California who used it as part of her presentation at an international conference on climate change in Sacramento last year .
And it didnt stop there .
To date , Joels gotten requests from over 40 environmental groups , in the United States , Canada and Europe .
And earlier this year , he got a request from the Green Party in Australia who used it in their campaign where it became part of the debate that resulted in the Australian parliament adopting the most rigorous carbon tax regime of any country in the world .
That is a lot of punch for 14 words .
So my suggestion to those of you out here who are seriously focused on creating a better world is to take a little bit of time each day and practice thinking funny , because you might just find the question that youve been looking for .
Thank you .
Sheikha Al Mayassa : Globalizing the local , localizing the global
Sheikha Al Mayassa , a patron of artists , storytellers and filmmakers in Qatar , talks about how art and culture create a countrys identity  -  -  and allow every country to share its unique identity with the wider world . As she says :  We dont want to be all the same , but we do want to understand each other . 
Both myself and my brother belong to the under 30 demographic , which Pat said makes 70 percent , but according to our statistics it makes 60 percent of the regions population .
Qatar is no exception to the region .
Its a very young nation led by young people .
We have been reminiscing about the latest technologies and the iPods , and for me the abaya , my traditional dress that Im wearing today .
Now this is not a religious garment , nor is it a religious statement .
Instead , its a diverse cultural statement that we choose to wear .
Now I remember a few years ago , a journalist asked Dr . Sheikha , whos sitting here , president of Qatar University  -  -  who , by the way , is a woman  -  -  he asked her whether she thought the abaya hindered or infringed her freedom in any way .
Her answer was quite the contrary .
Instead , she felt more free , more free because she could wear whatever she wanted under the abaya .
She could come to work in her pajamas and nobody would care .
Not that you do ; Im just saying .
My point is here , people have a choice  -  -  just like the Indian lady could wear her sari or the Japanese woman could wear her kimono .
We are changing our culture from within , but at the same time we are reconnecting with our traditions .
We know that modernization is happening .
And yes , Qatar wants to be a modern nation .
But at the same time we are reconnecting and reasserting our Arab heritage .
Its important for us to grow organically .
And we continuously make the conscious decision to reach that balance .
In fact , research has shown that the more the world is flat , if I use Tom Friedmans analogy , or global , the more and more people are wanting to be different .
And for us young people , theyre looking to become individuals and find their differences amongst themselves .
Which is why I prefer the Richard Wilk analogy of globalizing the local and localizing the global .
We dont want to be all the same , but we want to respect each other and understand each other .
And therefore tradition becomes more important , not less important .
Life necessitates a universal world , however , we believe in the security of having a local identity .
And this is what the leaders of this region are trying to do .
Were trying to be part of this global village , but at the same time were revising ourselves through our cultural institutions and cultural development .
Im a representation of that phenomenon .
And I think a lot of people in this room , I can see a lot of you are in the same position as myself .
And Im sure , although we cant see the people in Washington , they are in the same position .
Were continuously trying to straddle different worlds , different cultures and trying to meet the challenges of a different expectation from ourselves and from others .
So I want to ask a question : What should culture in the 21st century look like ?
In a time where the world is becoming personalized , when the mobile phone , the burger , the telephone , everything has its own personal identity , how should we perceive ourselves and how should we perceive others ?
How does that impact our desert culture ?
Im not sure of how many of you in Washington are aware of the cultural developments happening in the region and , the more recent , Museum of Islamic Art opened in Qatar in 2008 .
I myself am personalizing these cultural developments , but I also understand that this has to be done organically .
Yes , we do have all the resources that we need in order to develop new cultural institutions , but what I think is more important is that we are very fortunate to have visionary leaders who understand that this cant happen from outside , it has to come from within .
And guess what ?
You might be surprised to know that most people in the Gulf who are leading these cultural initiatives happen to be women .
I want to ask you , why do you think this is ?
Is it because its a soft option ; we have nothing else to do ?
No , I dont think so .
I think that women in this part of the world realize that culture is an important component to connect people both locally and regionally .
Its a natural component for bringing people together , discussing ideas  -  -  in the same way were doing here at TED .
Were here , were part of a community , sharing out ideas and discussing them .
Art becomes a very important part of our national identity .
The existential and social and political impact an artist has on his nations development of cultural identity is very important .
You know , art and culture is big business .
Ask me .
Ask the chairpersons and CEOs of Sothebys and Christies .
Ask Charles Saatchi about great art .
They make a lot of money .
So I think women in our society are becoming leaders , because they realize that for their future generations , its very important to maintain our cultural identities .
Why else do Greeks demand the return of the Elgin Marbles ?
And why is there an uproar when a private collector tries to sell his collection to a foreign museum ?
Why does it take me months on end to get an export license from London or New York in order to get pieces into my country ?
In few hours , Shirin Neshat , my friend from Iran whos a very important artist for us will be talking to you .
She lives in New York City , but she doesnt try to be a Western artist .
Instead , she tries to engage in a very important dialogue about her culture , nation and heritage .
She does that through important visual forms of photography and film .
In the same way , Qatar is trying to grow its national museums through an organic process from within .
Our mission is of cultural integration and independence .
We dont want to have what there is in the West .
We dont want their collections .
We want to build our own identities , our own fabric , create an open dialogue so that we share our ideas and share yours with us .
In a few days , we will be opening the Arab Museum of Modern Art .
We have done extensive research to ensure that Arab and Muslim artists , and Arabs who are not Muslims  -  -  not all Arabs are Muslims , by the way  -  -  but we make sure that they are represented in this new institution .
This institution is government - backed and it has been the case for the past three decades .
We will open the museum in a few days , and I welcome all of you to get on Qatar Airways and come and join us .
Now this museum is just as important to us as the West .
Some of you might have heard of the Algerian artist Baya Mahieddine , but I doubt a lot of people know that this artist worked in Picassos studio in Paris in the 1930s .
For me it was a new discovery .
And I think with time , in the years to come well be learning a lot about our Picassos , our Legers and our Cezannes .
We do have artists , but unfortunately we have not discovered them yet .
Now visual expression is just one form of culture integration .
We have realized that recently more and more people are using the means of YouTube and social networking to express their stories , share their photos and tell their own stories through their own voices .
In a similar way , we have created the Doha Film Institute .
Now the Doha Film Institute is an organization to teach people about film and filmmaking .
Last year we didnt have one Qatari woman filmmaker .
Today I am proud to say we have trained and educated over 66 Qatari women filmmakers to edit , tell their own stories in their own voices .
Now if youll allow me , I would love to share a one - minute film that has proven to show that a 60 - sec film can be as powerful as a haiku in telling a big picture .
And this is one of our filmmakers products .
Boy : Hey listen ! Did you know that the stocks are up ?
Who are you playing ?
Girl : Uncle Khaled . Here , put on the headscarf .
Khaled : Why would I want to put it on ?
Girl : Do as youre told , young girl .
Boy : No , you play mom and I play dad .
Play by yourself then .
Girl : Women ! One word and they get upset .
Useless .
Thank you . Thank you !
SM : Going back to straddling between East and West , last month we had our second Doha Tribeca Film Festival here in Doha .
The Doha Tribeca Film Festival was held at our new cultural hub , Katara .
It attracted 42,000 people , and we showcased 51 films .
Now the Doha Tribeca Film Festival is not an imported festival , but rather an important festival between the cities of New York and Doha .
Its important for two things .
First , it allows us to showcase our Arab filmmakers and voices to one of the most cosmopolitan cities in the world , New York City .
At the same time , we are inviting them to come and explore our part of the world .
Theyre learning our culture , our language , our heritage and realizing were just as different and just the same as each other .
Now over and over again , people have said ,  Lets build bridges ,  and frankly , I want to do more than that .
I would like break the walls of ignorance between East and West  -  -  no , not the soft option that we have discussed before , but rather the soft power that Joseph Nye has spoken about before .
Cultures a very important tool to bring people together .
We should not underestimate it .
 Know thyself ,  that is the journey of self - expression and self - realization that we are traveling .
Now I dont pretend to have all the answers , but I know that me as an individual and we as a nation welcome this community of ideas worth spreading .
This is a very interesting journey .
I welcome you on board for us to engage and discuss new ideas of how to bring people together through cultural initiatives and discussions .
Familiarity destroys and trumps fear . Try it .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much . Shokran .
Christopher  moot  Poole  : The case for anonymity online
The founder of 4 chan , a controversial , uncensored online imageboard , describes its subculture , some of the Internet  memes  it has launched , and the incident in which its users managed a very public , precision hack of a mainstream media website . The talk raises questions about the power  -  -  and price  -  -  of anonymity .
Tom Green : Thats a 4 chanthing .
These kids on the Internet , they have this group of kids and they like to say funny words like  barrel roll . 
Its a video game move from  Star Fox . 
 Star Fox 20  ?
Tom Green : Yeah . And theyve been dogging me for a year .
I got to tell you , its driving me nuts , actually .
Sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night and I scream ,  4 chan ! 
Christopher Poole : When I was 15 , I found this website called Futaba Channel .
And it was a Japanese forum and imageboard .
That format of forum , at that time , was not well - known outside of Japan .
And so what I did is I took it , I translated it into English , and I stuck it up for my friends to use .
Now , six and a half years later , over seven million people are using it , contributing over 700,000 posts per day .
And weve gone from one board to 48 boards .
This is what it looks like .
So , whats unique about the site is that its anonymous , and it has no memory .
Theres no archive , there are no barriers , theres no registration .
These things that were used to with forums dont exist on 4 chan .
And thats led to this discussion thats completely raw , completely unfiltered .
What the sites known for , because it has this environment , is its fostered the creation of a lot of Internet phenomena , viral videos and whatnot , known as  memes . 
Two of the largest memes that have come out of this site some of you might be familiar with are these LOLcats  -  -  just silly pictures of cats with text .
And this resonates with millions of people , apparently , because there are tens of thousands of these , and there is a whole blogging empire now dedicated to pictures like these .
And Rick Astleys kind of rebirth these past two years ...
Rickroll was this bait and switch , really simple , classic bait and switch .
Somebody says theyre linking to something interesting , and you get an 80s pop song . Thats all it was .
And it got big enough to the point where there was a float last year at the Macys Thanksgiving Day parade , and Rick Astley pops out , and rickrolls millions of people on television .
There are thousands of memes that come out of the site .
There are a handful that have escaped into the mainstream , the ones Ive just shown you , but every day , every month , people are producing thousands of these .
So does a site like this have rules ?
We do ; theyre the codified rules that Ive come up with , which are more - or - less ignored by the community .
And so theyve come up with their own set of rules , the  Rules of the Internet . 
And so there are three that I want to show you specifically .
Rule one is you dont talk about / b / .
Two is you do not talk about / b / .
And this ones kind of interesting :  If it exists , there is porn of it . No exceptions . 
And I will spare you that slide .
I assure you , it is very true .
/ b / is the first board we started with , and it is , in many ways , the beating heart of the website .
It is where a third of all the traffic is going .
And / b / is known for , more than anything , not just the memes theyve created , but the exploits .
And Chris just touched on one of those a second ago , and that was the Time 100 poll .
So somebody at Time , at the magazine , thought it would be fun to nominate me for this thing they did last year .
And so they placed me on it , and the Internet got wind of it . My community decided they wanted me to win it .
I didnt instruct them to do it ; they just decided that thats what they wanted .
And so , you know , 390 percent approval rating aint so bad .
So they broke that poll .
And I ended up on top .
I ended up at this really fancy party .
But thats not whats interesting about this .
Its that they werent putting me at the top of this list ; they were actually  -  -  it got so sophisticated to the point where they gamed all of the top 21 places to spell  mARBLECAKE . ALSO , THE GAME . 
The amount of time and effort that went into that is absolutely incredible .
And  marble cake  is significant because it is the channel that this group called Anonymous organized .
Anonymous is this group of people that protested , very famously , Scientology .
The story is , Scientology had this embarrassing video of Tom Cruise . It went up online .
They got it taken offline and managed to piss off part of the Internet .
And so these people , over 7,000 people , less than one month later , organized in a hundred cities around the globe and  -  -  this is L.A .  -  -  protested the Church of Scientology , and they have continued to do so , now , two full years after the fact .
They are still protesting .
So weve got this activist group thats this grassroots group thats come out of the site .
And last , Im going to show you the example , the story of Dusty the cat .
Dusty is the name that weve given to this cat .
This young man posted a video of him abusing his cat on YouTube .
And , you know , this didnt sit well with people , and so there was this outpouring of support for people to do something about this .
So what they did is they  -  -  I mean , they put CSI to shame here  -  -  the Internet detectives came out .
They matched , they found his MySpace .
They took the YouTube video and they mashed everything in the video .
Within 24 hours , they had his name , and within 48 hours , he was arrested .
And so , what I think is really intriguing about a community like 4 chanis just that its this open place .
As I said , its raw , its unfiltered .
And sites like it are kind of going the way of the dinosaur right now .
Theyre endangered because were moving towards social networking .
Were moving towards persistent identity .
Were moving towards , you know , a lack of privacy , really .
Were sacrificing a lot of that , and I think in doing so , moving towards those things , were losing something valuable .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Got a couple questions for you .
But if I ask them , is the TED website going to go down ?
CP : Youre lucky that this is not being streamed to them live right now .
Well , you never know . Some of them  -  -  weve got people in 75 countries out there watching .
Dont tell .
But seriously , this issue on anonymity is  -  -  I mean , you made the case there .
But anonymity basically allows people to say anything , all the rules gone .
Youve had to wrestle with issues like child pornography .
And Im just curious whether you sometimes lie awake in the night worrying that youve opened Pandoras box .
CP : Yes and no .
I mean , for as much good that kind of comes out of this environment , there is plenty of bad .
There are plenty of downsides .
But I think that the greater good is being served here by just allowing people  -  -  there are very few places , now , where you can go and not have identity , to be completely anonymous and say whatever youd like .
And saying whatever you like , I think , is powerful .
Doing whatever you like is now crossing a line .
But I think its important to have these places .
When I get emails , people say ,  Thank you for giving me this place , this outlet , where I can come after work and be myself . 
But words , saying things , you know , can be constructive ; it can be really damaging .
And if you cut the link between what is said and any attribution back to you , I mean , surely there are huge risks with that .
CP : There are , certainly .
But  -  -  Tell me about what  -  -  I mean , I think you asked the board what you might say at TED , right ?
CP : Yeah , I posted a thread on Sunday .
And within 24 hours , it had over 12,000 responses .
And the thing is , I didnt make it into that presentation because I cant read to you anything that they said , more or less .
99 percent of it is just , would have been , you know , bleeped out .
But there were some good things that came out of that too .
Love and peace were mentioned .
Love and peace were mentioned , kind of with quote marks around them , right ?
CP : Cats and dogs were mentioned too .
And that content is all off the board now .
Right , its gone ? Or is it still up there ?
CP : I stuck that thread so it lasted a few days .
It went up to about 16,000 posts , and now it has been taken off .
Okay , well .
Now , Im not sure I would have necessarily recommended everyone at TED to go and check it out anyway .
Chris , you yourself ? I mean , youre a figure of some intrigue .
Youve got this surprising semi - underground influence , but its not making you a lot of money , yet .
Whats the commercial picture here ?
CP : The commercial picture is that there really isnt much of one , I guess .
The site has adult content on it .
I mean , obviously , its got some very offensive , obscene content on it , just in terms of language alone .
And when youve got that , youve pretty much sacrificed any hope of making lots of money .
But you still live at home , right ?
CP : I actually moved out recently .
Thats very cool .
CP : I got out of Moms , and Im back in school right now .
But what conversations did you or do you have with your mother about 4 chan ?
CP : At first , very kind of pained , awkward conversations .
The content is not dinner table conversation in the least .
But my parents  -  -  I think part of why they kind of are able to appreciate it is because they dont understand it .
And they were probably pleased to see you on top of the Time poll .
CP : Yeah . They still didnt know what to think of that though .
And so , in 10 years time , what do you picture yourself doing ?
CP : Thats a good question .
As I said , I just went back to school , and I am considering majoring in urban studies and then going on to urban planning , kind of taking whatever Ive learned from online communities and trying to adapt that to a physical community .
Chris , thank you . Absolutely fascinating . Thank you for coming to TED .
Matt Ridley : When ideas have sex
At TEDGlobal 2010 , author Matt Ridley shows how , throughout history , the engine of human progress has been the meeting and mating of ideas to make new ideas . Its not important how clever individuals are , he says ; what really matters is how smart the collective brain is .
When I was a student here in Oxford in the 1970s , the future of the world was bleak .
The population explosion was unstoppable .
Global famine was inevitable .
A cancer epidemic caused by chemicals in the environment was going to shorten our lives .
The acid rain was falling on the forests .
The desert was advancing by a mile or two a year .
The oil was running out , and a nuclear winter would finish us off .
None of those things happened , and astonishingly , if you look at what actually happened in my lifetime , the average per - capita income of the average person on the planet , in real terms , adjusted for inflation , has tripled .
Lifespan is up by 30 percent in my lifetime .
Child mortality is down by two - thirds .
Per - capita food production is up by a third .
And all this at a time when the population has doubled .
How did we achieve that , whether you think its a good thing or not ?
How did we achieve that ?
How did we become the only species that becomes more prosperous as it becomes more populous ?
The size of the blob in this graph represents the size of the population , and the level of the graph represents GDP per capita .
I think to answer that question you need to understand how human beings bring together their brains and enable their ideas to combine and recombine , to meet and , indeed , to mate .
In other words , you need to understand how ideas have sex .
I want you to imagine how we got from making objects like this to making objects like this .
These are both real objects .
One is an Acheulean hand axe from half a million years ago of the kind made by Homo erectus .
The other is obviously a computer mouse .
Theyre both exactly the same size and shape to an uncanny degree .
Ive tried to work out which is bigger , and its almost impossible .
And thats because theyre both designed to fit the human hand .
Theyre both technologies . In the end , their similarity is not that interesting .
It just tells you they were both designed to fit the human hand .
The differences are what interest me , because the one on the left was made to a pretty unvarying design for about a million years  -  -  from one - and - a - half million years ago to half a million years ago .
Homo erectus made the same tool for 30,000 generations .
Of course there were a few changes , but tools changed slower than skeletons in those days .
There was no progress , no innovation .
Its an extraordinary phenomenon , but its true .
Whereas the object on the right is obsolete after five years .
And theres another difference too , which is the object on the left is made from one substance .
The object on the right is made from a confection of different substances , from silicon and metal and plastic and so on .
And more than that , its a confection of different ideas , the idea of plastic , the idea of a laser , the idea of transistors .
Theyve all been combined together in this technology .
And its this combination , this cumulative technology , that intrigues me , because I think its the secret to understanding whats happening in the world .
My bodys an accumulation of ideas too : the idea of skin cells , the idea of brain cells , the idea of liver cells .
Theyve come together .
How does evolution do cumulative , combinatorial things ?
Well , it uses sexual reproduction .
In an asexual species , if you get two different mutations in different creatures , a green one and a red one , then one has to be better than the other .
One goes extinct for the other to survive .
But if you have a sexual species , then its possible for an individual to inherit both mutations from different lineages .
So what sex does is it enables the individual to draw upon the genetic innovations of the whole species .
Its not confined to its own lineage .
Whats the process thats having the same effect in cultural evolution as sex is having in biological evolution ?
And I think the answer is exchange , the habit of exchanging one thing for another .
Its a unique human feature .
No other animal does it .
You can teach them in the laboratory to do a little bit of exchange  -  -  and indeed theres reciprocity in other animals  -  -  But the exchange of one object for another never happens .
As Adam Smith said ,  No man ever saw a dog make a fair exchange of a bone with another dog . 
You can have culture without exchange .
You can have , as it were , asexual culture .
Chimpanzees , killer whales , these kinds of creatures , they have culture .
They teach each other traditions which are handed down from parent to offspring .
In this case , chimpanzees teaching each other how to crack nuts with rocks .
But the difference is that these cultures never expand , never grow , never accumulate , never become combinatorial , and the reason is because there is no sex , as it were , there is no exchange of ideas .
Chimpanzee troops have different cultures in different troops .
Theres no exchange of ideas between them .
And why does exchange raise living standards ?
Well , the answer came from David Ricardo in 1817 .
And here is a Stone Age version of his story , although he told it in terms of trade between countries .
Adam takes four hours to make a spear and three hours to make an axe .
Oz takes one hour to make a spear and two hours to make an axe .
So Oz is better at both spears and axes than Adam .
He doesnt need Adam .
He can make his own spears and axes .
Well no , because if you think about it , if Oz makes two spears and Adam make two axes , and then they trade , then they will each have saved an hour of work .
And the more they do this , the more true its going to be , because the more they do this , the better Adam is going to get at making axes and the better Oz is going to get at making spears .
So the gains from trade are only going to grow .
And this is one of the beauties of exchange , is it actually creates the momentum for more specialization , which creates the momentum for more exchange and so on .
Adam and Oz both saved an hour of time .
That is prosperity , the saving of time in satisfying your needs .
Ask yourself how long you would have to work to provide for yourself an hour of reading light this evening to read a book by .
If you had to start from scratch , lets say you go out into the countryside .
You find a sheep . You kill it . You get the fat out of it .
You render it down . You make a candle , etc . etc .
How long is it going to take you ? Quite a long time .
How long do you actually have to work to earn an hour of reading light if youre on the average wage in Britain today ?
And the answer is about half a second .
Back in 1950 , you would have had to work for eight seconds on the average wage to acquire that much light .
And thats seven and a half seconds of prosperity that youve gained since 1950 , as it were , because thats seven and a half seconds in which you can do something else , or you can acquire another good or service .
And back in 1880 , it would have been 15 minutes to earn that amount of light on the average wage .
Back in 1800 , youd have had to work six hours to earn a candle that could burn for an hour .
In other words , the average person on the average wage could not afford a candle in 1800 .
Go back to this image of the axe and the mouse , and ask yourself :  Who made them and for who ? 
The stone axe was made by someone for himself .
It was self - sufficiency .
We call that poverty these days .
But the object on the right was made for me by other people .
How many other people ?
Tens ? Hundreds ? Thousands ?
You know , I think its probably millions .
Because youve got to include the man who grew the coffee , which was brewed for the man who was on the oil rig , who was drilling for oil , which was going to be made into the plastic , etc .
They were all working for me , to make a mouse for me .
And thats the way society works .
Thats what weve achieved as a species .
In the old days , if you were rich , you literally had people working for you .
Thats how you got to be rich ; you employed them .
Louis XIV had a lot of people working for him .
They made his silly outfits , like this , and they did his silly hairstyles , or whatever .
He had 498 people to prepare his dinner every night .
But a modern tourist going around the palace of Versailles and looking at Louis XIVs pictures , he has 498 people doing his dinner tonight too .
Theyre in bistros and cafes and restaurants and shops all over Paris , and theyre all ready to serve you at an hours notice with an excellent meal thats probably got higher quality than Louis XIV even had .
And thats what weve done , because were all working for each other .
Were able to draw upon specialization and exchange to raise each others living standards .
Now , you do get other animals working for each other too .
Ants are a classic example ; workers work for queens and queens work for workers .
But theres a big difference , which is that it only happens within the colony .
Theres no working for each other across the colonies .
And the reason for that is because theres a reproductive division of labor .
That is to say , they specialize with respect to reproduction .
The queen does it all .
In our species , we dont like doing that .
Its the one thing we insist on doing for ourselves , is reproduction .
Even in England , we dont leave reproduction to the Queen .
So when did this habit start ?
And how long has it been going on ? And what does it mean ?
Well , I think , probably , the oldest version of this is probably the sexual division of labor .
But Ive got no evidence for that .
It just looks like the first thing we did was work male for female and female for male .
In all hunter - gatherer societies today , theres a foraging division of labor between , on the whole , hunting males and gathering females .
It isnt always quite that simple , but theres a distinction between specialized roles for males and females .
And the beauty of this system is that it benefits both sides .
The woman knows that , in the Hadzas case here  -  -  digging roots to share with men in exchange for meat  -  -  she knows that all she has to do to get access to protein is to dig some extra roots and trade them for meat .
And she doesnt have to go on an exhausting hunt and try and kill a warthog .
And the man knows that he doesnt have to do any digging to get roots .
All he has to do is make sure that when he kills a warthog its big enough to share some .
And so both sides raise each others standards of living through the sexual division of labor .
When did this happen ? We dont know , but its possible that Neanderthals didnt do this .
They were a highly cooperative species .
They were a highly intelligent species .
Their brains on average , by the end , were bigger than yours and mine in this room today .
They were imaginative . They buried their dead .
They had language , probably , because we know they had the FOXP2 gene of the same kind as us , which was discovered here in Oxford .
And so it looks like they probably had linguistic skills .
They were brilliant people . Im not dissing the Neanderthals .
But theres no evidence of a sexual division of labor .
Theres no evidence of gathering behavior by females .
It looks like the females were cooperative hunters with the men .
And the other thing theres no evidence for is exchange between groups , because the objects that you find in Neanderthal remains , the tools they made , are always made from local materials .
For example , in the Caucasus theres a site where you find local Neanderthal tools .
Theyre always made from local chert .
In the same valley there are modern human remains from about the same date , 30,000 years ago , and some of those are from local chert , but more  -  -  but many of them are made from obsidian from a long way away .
And when human beings began moving objects around like this , it was evidence that they were exchanging between groups .
Trade is 10 times as old as farming .
People forget that . People think of trade as a modern thing .
Exchange between groups has been going on for a hundred thousand years .
And the earliest evidence for it crops up somewhere between 80 and 120,000 years ago in Africa , when you see obsidian and jasper and other things moving long distances in Ethiopia .
You also see seashells  -  -  as discovered by a team here in Oxford  -  -  moving 125 miles inland from the Mediterranean in Algeria .
And thats evidence that people have started exchanging between groups .
And that will have led to specialization .
How do you know that long - distance movement means trade rather than migration ?
Well , you look at modern hunter gatherers like aboriginals , who quarried for stone axes at a place called Mount Isa , which was a quarry owned by the Kalkadoon tribe .
They traded them with their neighbors for things like stingray barbs , and the consequence was that stone axes ended up over a large part of Australia .
So long - distance movement of tools is a sign of trade , not migration .
What happens when you cut people off from exchange , from the ability to exchange and specialize ?
And the answer is that not only do you slow down technological progress , you can actually throw it into reverse .
An example is Tasmania .
When the sea level rose and Tasmania became an island 10,000 years ago , the people on it not only experienced slower progress than people on the mainland , they actually experienced regress .
They gave up the ability to make stone tools and fishing equipment and clothing because the population of about 4,000 people was simply not large enough to maintain the specialized skills necessary to keep the technology they had .
Its as if the people in this room were plonked on a desert island .
How many of the things in our pockets could we continue to make after 10,000 years ?
It didnt happen in Tierra del Fuego  -  -  similar island , similar people .
The reason : because Tierra del Fuego is separated from South America by a much narrower straight , and there was trading contact across that straight throughout 10,000 years .
The Tasmanians were isolated .
Go back to this image again and ask yourself , not only who made it and for who , but who knew how to make it .
In the case of the stone axe , the man who made it knew how to make it .
But who knows how to make a computer mouse ?
Nobody , literally nobody .
There is nobody on the planet who knows how to make a computer mouse .
I mean this quite seriously .
The president of the computer mouse company doesnt know .
He just knows how to run a company .
The person on the assembly line doesnt know because he doesnt know how to drill an oil well to get oil out to make plastic , and so on .
We all know little bits , but none of us knows the whole .
I am of course quoting from a famous essay by Leonard Read , the economist in the 1950s , called  I , Pencil  in which he wrote about how a pencil came to be made , and how nobody knows even how to make a pencil , because the people who assemble it dont know how to mine graphite , and they dont know how to fell trees and that kind of thing .
And what weve done in human society , through exchange and specialization , is weve created the ability to do things that we dont even understand .
Its not the same with language .
With language we have to transfer ideas that we understand with each other .
But with technology , we can actually do things that are beyond our capabilities .
Weve gone beyond the capacity of the human mind to an extraordinary degree .
And by the way , thats one of the reasons that Im not interested in the debate about I.Q . , about whether some groups have higher I.Q . s than other groups .
Its completely irrelevant .
Whats relevant to a society is how well people are communicating their ideas , and how well theyre cooperating , not how clever the individuals are .
So weve created something called the collective brain .
Were just the nodes in the network .
Were the neurons in this brain .
Its the interchange of ideas , the meeting and mating of ideas between them , that is causing technological progress , incrementally , bit by bit .
However , bad things happen .
And in the future , as we go forward , we will , of course , experience terrible things .
There will be wars ; there will be depressions ; there will be natural disasters .
Awful things will happen in this century , Im absolutely sure .
But Im also sure that , because of the connections people are making , and the ability of ideas to meet and to mate as never before , Im also sure that technology will advance , and therefore living standards will advance .
Because through the cloud , through crowd sourcing , through the bottom - up world that weve created , where not just the elites but everybody is able to have their ideas and make them meet and mate , we are surely accelerating the rate of innovation .
Thank you .
Honor Harger : A history of the universe in sound
Artist - technologist Honor Harger listens to the weird and wonderful noises of stars and planets and pulsars . In her work , she tracks the radio waves emitted by ancient celestial objects and turns them into sound , including  the oldest song you will ever hear ,  the sound of cosmic rays left over from the Big Bang .
Space , we all know what it looks like .
Weve been surrounded by images of space our whole lives , from the speculative images of science fiction to the inspirational visions of artists to the increasingly beautiful pictures made possible by complex technologies .
But whilst we have an overwhelmingly vivid visual understanding of space , we have no sense of what space sounds like .
And indeed , most people associate space with silence .
But the story of how we came to understand the universe is just as much a story of listening as it is by looking .
And yet despite this , hardly any of us have ever heard space .
How many of you here could describe the sound of a single planet or star ?
Well in case youve ever wondered , this is what the Sun sounds like .
This is the planet Jupiter .
And this is the space probe Cassini pirouetting through the ice rings of Saturn .
This is a a highly condensed clump of neutral matter , spinning in the distant universe .
So my artistic practice is all about listening to the weird and wonderful noises emitted by the magnificent celestial objects that make up our universe .
And you may wonder , how do we know what these sounds are ?
How can we tell the difference between the sound of the Sun and the sound of a pulsar ?
Well the answer is the science of radio astronomy .
Radio astronomers study radio waves from space using sensitive antennas and receivers , which give them precise information about what an astronomical object is and where it is in our night sky .
And just like the signals that we send and receive here on Earth , we can convert these transmissions into sound using simple analog techniques .
And therefore , its through listening that weve come to uncover some of the universes most important secrets  -  -  its scale , what its made of and even how old it is .
So today , Im going to tell you a short story of the history of the universe through listening .
Its punctuated by three quick anecdotes , which show how accidental encounters with strange noises gave us some of the most important information we have about space .
Now this story doesnt start with vast telescopes or futuristic spacecraft , but a rather more humble technology  -  -  and in fact , the very medium which gave us the telecommunications revolution that were all part of today : the telephone .
Its 1876 , its in Boston , and this is Alexander Graham Bell who was working with Thomas Watson on the invention of the telephone .
A key part of their technical set up was a half - mile long length of wire , which was thrown across the rooftops of several houses in Boston .
The line carried the telephone signals that would later make Bell a household name .
But like any long length of charged wire , it also inadvertently became an antenna .
Thomas Watson spent hours listening to the strange crackles and hisses and chirps and whistles that his accidental antenna detected .
Now you have to remember , this is 10 years before Heinrich Hertz proved the existence of radio waves  -  -  15 years before Nikola Teslas four - tuned circuit  -  -  nearly 20 years before Marconis first broadcast .
So Thomas Watson wasnt listening to us .
We didnt have the technology to transmit .
So what were these strange noises ?
Watson was in fact listening to very low - frequency radio emissions caused by nature .
Some of the crackles and pops were lightning , but the eerie whistles and curiously melodious chirps had a rather more exotic origin .
Using the very first telephone , Watson was in fact dialed into the heavens .
As he correctly guessed , some of these sounds were caused by activity on the surface of the Sun .
It was a solar wind interacting with our ionosphere that he was listening to  -  -  a phenomena which we can see at the extreme northern and southern latitudes of our planet as the aurora .
So whilst inventing the technology that would usher in the telecommunications revolution , Watson had discovered that the star at the center of our solar system emitted powerful radio waves .
He had accidentally been the first person to tune in to them .
Fast - forward 50 years , and Bell and Watsons technology has completely transformed global communications .
But going from slinging some wire across rooftops in Boston to laying thousands and thousands of miles of cable on the Atlantic Ocean seabed is no easy matter .
And so before long , Bell were looking to new technologies to optimize their revolution .
Radio could carry sound without wires .
But the medium is lossy  -  -  its subject to a lot of noise and interference .
So Bell employed an engineer to study those noises , to try and find out where they came from , with a view towards building the perfect hardware codec , which would get rid of them so they could think about using radio for the purposes of telephony .
Most of the noises that the engineer , Karl Jansky , investigated were fairly prosaic in origin .
They turned out to be lightning or sources of electrical power .
But there was one persistent noise that Jansky couldnt identify , and it seemed to appear in his radio headset four minutes earlier each day .
Now any astronomer will tell you , this is the telltale sign of something that doesnt originate from Earth .
Jansky had made a historic discovery , that celestial objects could emit radio waves as well as light waves .
Fifty years on from Watsons accidental encounter with the Sun , Janskys careful listening ushered in a new age of space exploration : the radio astronomy age .
Over the next few years , astronomers connected up their antennas to loudspeakers and learned about our radio sky , about Jupiter and the Sun , by listening .
Lets jump ahead again .
Its 1964 , and were back at Bell Labs .
And once again , two scientists have got a problem with noise .
Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson were using the horn antenna at Bells Holmdel laboratory to study the Milky Way with extraordinary precision .
They were really listening to the galaxy in high fidelity .
There was a glitch in their soundtrack .
A mysterious persistent noise was disrupting their research .
It was in the microwave range , and it appeared to be coming from all directions simultaneously .
Now this didnt make any sense , and like any reasonable engineer or scientist , they assumed that the problem must be the technology itself , it must be the dish .
There were pigeons roosting in the dish .
And so perhaps once they cleaned up the pigeon droppings , get the disk kind of operational again , normal operations would resume .
But the noise didnt disappear .
The mysterious noise that Penzias and Wilson were listening to turned out to be the oldest and most significant sound that anyone had ever heard .
It was cosmic radiation left over from the very birth of the universe .
This was the first experimental evidence that the Big Bang existed and the universe was born at a precise moment some 14.7 billion years ago .
So our story ends at the beginning  -  -  the beginning of all things , the Big Bang .
This is the noise that Penzias and Wilson heard  -  -  the oldest sound that youre ever going to hear , the cosmic microwave background radiation left over from the Big Bang .
Thanks .
Stewart Brand : The dawn of de - extinction . Are you ready ?
Throughout humankinds history , weve driven species after species extinct : the passenger pigeon , the Eastern cougar , the dodo ... But now , says Stewart Brand , we have the technology to bring back species that humanity wiped out . So  -  -  should we ? Which ones ? He asks a big question whose answer is closer than you may think .
Now , extinction is a different kind of death .
Its bigger .
We didnt really realize that until 1914 , when the last passenger pigeon , a female named Martha , died at the Cincinnati zoo .
This had been the most abundant bird in the world thatd been in North America for six million years .
Suddenly it wasnt here at all .
Flocks that were a mile wide and 400 miles long used to darken the sun .
Aldo Leopold said this was a biological storm , a feathered tempest .
And indeed it was a keystone species that enriched the entire eastern deciduous forest , from the Mississippi to the Atlantic , from Canada down to the Gulf .
But it went from five billion birds to zero in just a couple decades .
What happened ?
Well , commercial hunting happened .
These birds were hunted for meat that was sold by the ton , and it was easy to do because when those big flocks came down to the ground , they were so dense that hundreds of hunters and netters could show up and slaughter them by the tens of thousands .
It was the cheapest source of protein in America .
By the end of the century , there was nothing left but these beautiful skins in museum specimen drawers .
Theres an upside to the story .
This made people realize that the same thing was about to happen to the American bison , and so these birds saved the buffalos .
But a lot of other animals werent saved .
The Carolina parakeet was a parrot that lit up backyards everywhere .
It was hunted to death for its feathers .
There was a bird that people liked on the East Coast called the heath hen .
It was loved . They tried to protect it . It died anyway .
A local newspaper spelled out ,  There is no survivor , there is no future , there is no life to be recreated in this form ever again . 
Theres a sense of deep tragedy that goes with these things , and it happened to lots of birds that people loved .
It happened to lots of mammals .
Another keystone species is a famous animal called the European aurochs .
There was sort of a movie made about it recently .
And the aurochs was like the bison .
This was an animal that basically kept the forest mixed with grasslands across the entire Europe and Asian continent , from Spain to Korea .
The documentation of this animal goes back to the Lascaux cave paintings .
The extinctions still go on .
Theres an ibex in Spain called the bucardo .
It went extinct in 2000 .
There was a marvelous animal , a marsupial wolf called the thylacine in Tasmania , south of Australia , called the Tasmanian tiger .
It was hunted until there were just a few left to die in zoos .
A little bit of film was shot .
Sorrow , anger , mourning .
Dont mourn . Organize .
What if you could find out that , using the DNA in museum specimens , fossils maybe up to 200,000 years old could be used to bring species back , what would you do ? Where would you start ?
Well , youd start by finding out if the biotech is really there .
I started with my wife , Ryan Phelan , who ran a biotech business called DNA Direct , and through her , one of her colleagues , George Church , one of the leading genetic engineers who turned out to be also obsessed with passenger pigeons and a lot of confidence that methodologies he was working on might actually do the deed .
So he and Ryan organized and hosted a meeting at the Wyss Institute in Harvard bringing together specialists on passenger pigeons , conservation ornithologists , bioethicists , and fortunately passenger pigeon DNA had already been sequenced by a molecular biologist named Beth Shapiro .
All she needed from those specimens at the Smithsonian was a little bit of toe pad tissue , because down in there is what is called ancient DNA .
Its DNA which is pretty badly fragmented , but with good techniques now , you can basically reassemble the whole genome .
Then the question is , can you reassemble , with that genome , the whole bird ?
George Church thinks you can .
So in his book ,  Regenesis ,  which I recommend , he has a chapter on the science of bringing back extinct species , and he has a machine called the Multiplex Automated Genome Engineering machine .
Its kind of like an evolution machine .
You try combinations of genes that you write at the cell level and then in organs on a chip , and the ones that win , that you can then put into a living organism . Itll work .
The precision of this , one of Georges famous unreadable slides , nevertheless points out that theres a level of precision here right down to the individual base pair .
The passenger pigeon has 1.3 billion base pairs in its genome .
So what youre getting is the capability now of replacing one gene with another variation of that gene .
Its called an allele .
Well thats what happens in normal hybridization anyway .
So this is a form of synthetic hybridization of the genome of an extinct species with the genome of its closest living relative .
Now along the way , George points out that his technology , the technology of synthetic biology , is currently accelerating at four times the rate of Moores Law .
Its been doing that since 2005 , and its likely to continue .
Okay , the closest living relative of the passenger pigeon is the band - tailed pigeon . Theyre abundant . Theres some around here .
Genetically , the band - tailed pigeon already is mostly living passenger pigeon .
Theres just some bits that are band - tailed pigeon .
If you replace those bits with passenger pigeon bits , youve got the extinct bird back , cooing at you .
Now , theres work to do .
You have to figure out exactly what genes matter .
So theres genes for the short tail in the band - tailed pigeon , genes for the long tail in the passenger pigeon , and so on with the red eye , peach - colored breast , flocking , and so on .
Add them all up and the result wont be perfect .
But it should be be perfect enough , because nature doesnt do perfect either .
So this meeting in Boston led to three things .
First off , Ryan and I decided to create a nonprofit called Revive and Restore that would push de - extinction generally and try to have it go in a responsible way , and we would push ahead with the passenger pigeon .
Another direct result was a young grad student named Ben Novak , who had been obsessed with passenger pigeons since he was 14 and had also learned how to work with ancient DNA , himself sequenced the passenger pigeon , using money from his family and friends .
We hired him full - time .
Now , this photograph I took of him last year at the Smithsonian , hes looking down at Martha , the last passenger pigeon alive .
So if hes successful , she wont be the last .
The third result of the Boston meeting was the realization that there are scientists all over the world working on various forms of de - extinction , but theyd never met each other .
And National Geographic got interested because National Geographic has the theory that the last century , discovery was basically finding things , and in this century , discovery is basically making things .
De - extinction falls in that category .
So they hosted and funded this meeting . And 35 scientists , they were conservation biologists and molecular biologists , basically meeting to see if they had work to do together .
Some of these conservation biologists are pretty radical .
Theres three of them who are not just re - creating ancient species , theyre recreating extinct ecosystems in northern Siberia , in the Netherlands , and in Hawaii .
Henri , from the Netherlands , with a Dutch last name I wont try to pronounce , is working on the aurochs .
The aurochs is the ancestor of all domestic cattle , and so basically its genome is alive , its just unevenly distributed .
So what theyre doing is working with seven breeds of primitive , hardy - looking cattle like that Maremmana primitivo on the top there to rebuild , over time , with selective back - breeding , the aurochs .
Now , re - wilding is moving faster in Korea than it is in America , and so the plan is , with these re - wilded areas all over Europe , they will introduce the aurochs to do its old job , its old ecological role , of clearing the somewhat barren , closed - canopy forest so that it has these biodiverse meadows in it .
Another amazing story came from Alberto Fernández - Arias .
Alberto worked with the bucardo in Spain .
The last bucardo was a female named Celia who was still alive , but then they captured her , they got a little bit of tissue from her ear , they cryopreserved it in liquid nitrogen , released her back into the wild , but a few months later , she was found dead under a fallen tree .
They took the DNA from that ear , they planted it as a cloned egg in a goat , the pregnancy came to term , and a live baby bucardo was born .
It was the first de - extinction in history .
It was short - lived .
Sometimes interspecies clones have respiration problems .
This one had a malformed lung and died after 10 minutes , but Alberto was confident that cloning has moved along well since then , and this will move ahead , and eventually there will be a population of bucardos back in the mountains in northern Spain .
Cryopreservation pioneer of great depth is Oliver Ryder .
At the San Diego zoo , his frozen zoo has collected the tissues from over 1,000 species over the last 35 years .
Now , when its frozen that deep , minus 196 degrees Celsius , the cells are intact and the DNA is intact .
Theyre basically viable cells , so someone like Bob Lanza at Advanced Cell Technology took some of that tissue from an endangered animal called the Javan banteng , put it in a cow , the cow went to term , and what was born was a live , healthy baby Javan banteng , who thrived and is still alive .
The most exciting thing for Bob Lanza is the ability now to take any kind of cell with induced pluripotent stem cells and turn it into germ cells , like sperm and eggs .
So now we go to Mike McGrew who is a scientist at Roslin Institute in Scotland , and Mikes doing miracles with birds .
So hell take , say , falcon skin cells , fibroblast , turn it into induced pluripotent stem cells .
Since its so pluripotent , it can become germ plasm .
He then has a way to put the germ plasm into the embryo of a chicken egg so that that chicken will have , basically , the gonads of a falcon .
You get a male and a female each of those , and out of them comes falcons .
Real falcons out of slightly doctored chickens .
Ben Novak was the youngest scientist at the meeting .
He showed how all of this can be put together .
The sequence of events : hell put together the genomes of the band - tailed pigeon and the passenger pigeon , hell take the techniques of George Church and get passenger pigeon DNA , the techniques of Robert Lanza and Michael McGrew , get that DNA into chicken gonads , and out of the chicken gonads get passenger pigeon eggs , squabs , and now youre getting a population of passenger pigeons .
It does raise the question of , theyre not going to have passenger pigeon parents to teach them how to be a passenger pigeon .
So what do you do about that ?
Well birds are pretty hard - wired , as it happens , so most of that is already in their DNA , but to supplement it , part of Bens idea is to use homing pigeons to help train the young passenger pigeons how to flock and feeding grounds .
There were some conservationists , really famous conservationists like Stanley Temple , who is one of the founders of conservation biology , and Kate Jones from the IUCN , which does the Red List .
Theyre excited about all this , but theyre also concerned that it might be competitive with the extremely important efforts to protect endangered species that are still alive , that havent gone extinct yet .
You see , you want to work on protecting the animals out there .
You want to work on getting the market for ivory in Asia down so youre not using 25,000 elephants a year .
But at the same time , conservation biologists are realizing that bad news bums people out .
And so the Red List is really important , keep track of whats endangered and critically endangered , and so on .
But theyre about to create what they call a Green List , and the Green List will have species that are doing fine , thank you , species that were endangered , like the bald eagle , but theyre much better off now , thanks to everybodys good work , and protected areas around the world that are very , very well managed .
So basically , theyre learning how to build on good news .
And they see reviving extinct species as the kind of good news you might be able to build on .
Heres a couple related examples .
Captive breeding will be a major part of bringing back these species .
The California condor was down to 22 birds in 1987 .
Everybody thought is was finished .
Thanks to captive breeding at the San Diego Zoo , theres 405 of them now , 226 are out in the wild .
That technology will be used on de - extincted animals .
Another success story is the mountain gorilla in Central Africa .
In 1981 , Dian Fossey was sure they were going extinct .
There were just 254 left .
Now there are 880 . Theyre increasing in population by three percent a year .
The secret is , they have an eco - tourism program , which is absolutely brilliant .
So this photograph was taken last month by Ryan with an IPhone .
Thats how comfortable these wild gorillas are with visitors .
Another interesting project , though its going to need some help , is the northern white rhinoceros .
Theres no breeding pairs left .
But this is the kind of thing that a wide variety of DNA for this animal is available in the frozen zoo .
A bit of cloning , you can get them back .
So where do we go from here ?
These have been private meetings so far .
I think its time for the subject to go public .
What do people think about it ?
You know , do you want extinct species back ?
Do you want extinct species back ?
Tinker Bell is going to come fluttering down .
It is a Tinker Bell moment , because what are people excited about with this ?
What are they concerned about ?
Were also going to push ahead with the passenger pigeon .
So Ben Novak , even as we speak , is joining the group that Beth Shapiro has at UC Santa Cruz .
Theyre going to work on the genomes of the passenger pigeon and the band - tailed pigeon .
As that data matures , theyll send it to George Church , who will work his magic , get passenger pigeon DNA out of that .
Well get help from Bob Lanza and Mike McGrew to get that into germ plasm that can go into chickens that can produce passenger pigeon squabs that can be raised by band - tailed pigeon parents , and then from then on , its passenger pigeons all the way , maybe for the next six million years .
You can do the same thing , as the costs come down , for the Carolina parakeet , for the great auk , for the heath hen , for the ivory - billed woodpecker , for the Eskimo curlew , for the Caribbean monk seal , for the woolly mammoth .
Because the fact is , humans have made a huge hole in nature in the last 10,000 years .
We have the ability now , and maybe the moral obligation , to repair some of the damage .
Most of that well do by expanding and protecting wildlands , by expanding and protecting the populations of endangered species .
But some species that we killed off totally we could consider bringing back to a world that misses them .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Ive got a question .
So , this is an emotional topic . Some people stand .
I suspect there are some people out there sitting , kind of asking tormented questions , almost , about , well , wait , wait , wait , wait , wait , wait a minute , theres something wrong with mankind interfering in nature in this way .
Theres going to be unintended consequences .
Youre going to uncork some sort of Pandoras box of who - knows - what . Do they have a point ?
Stewart Brand : Well , the earlier point is we interfered in a big way by making these animals go extinct , and many of them were keystone species , and we changed the whole ecosystem they were in by letting them go .
Now , theres the shifting baseline problem , which is , so when these things come back , they might replace some birds that are there that people really know and love .
I think thats , you know , part of how itll work .
This is a long , slow process  -  -  One of the things I like about it , its multi - generation .
We will get woolly mammoths back .
Well it feels like both the conversation and the potential here are pretty thrilling .
Thank you so much for presenting . SB : Thank you .
Thank you .
Tan Le : A headset that reads your brainwaves
Tan Les astonishing new computer interface reads its users brainwaves , making it possible to control virtual objects , and even physical electronics , with mere thoughts . She demos the headset , and talks about its far - reaching applications .
Up until now , our communication with machines has always been limited to conscious and direct forms .
Whether its something simple like turning on the lights with a switch , or even as complex as programming robotics , we have always had to give a command to a machine , or even a series of commands , in order for it to do something for us .
Communication between people , on the other hand , is far more complex and a lot more interesting because we take into account so much more than what is explicitly expressed .
We observe facial expressions , body language , and we can intuit feelings and emotions from our dialogue with one another .
This actually forms a large part of our decision - making process .
Our vision is to introduce this whole new realm of human interaction into human - computer interaction so that computers can understand not only what you direct it to do , but it can also respond to your facial expressions and emotional experiences .
And what better way to do this than by interpreting the signals naturally produced by our brain , our center for control and experience .
Well , it sounds like a pretty good idea , but this task , as Bruno mentioned , isnt an easy one for two main reasons : First , the detection algorithms .
Our brain is made up of billions of active neurons , around 170,000 km of combined axon length .
When these neurons interact , the chemical reaction emits an electrical impulse , which can be measured .
The majority of our functional brain is distributed over the outer surface layer of the brain , and to increase the area thats available for mental capacity , the brain surface is highly folded .
Now this cortical folding presents a significant challenge for interpreting surface electrical impulses .
Each individuals cortex is folded differently , very much like a fingerprint .
So even though a signal may come from the same functional part of the brain , by the time the structure has been folded , its physical location is very different between individuals , even identical twins .
There is no longer any consistency in the surface signals .
Our breakthrough was to create an algorithm that unfolds the cortex , so that we can map the signals closer to its source , and therefore making it capable of working across a mass population .
The second challenge is the actual device for observing brainwaves .
EEG measurements typically involve a hairnet with an array of sensors , like the one that you can see here in the photo .
A technician will put the electrodes onto the scalp using a conductive gel or paste and usually after a procedure of preparing the scalp by light abrasion .
Now this is quite time consuming and isnt the most comfortable process .
And on top of that , these systems actually cost in the tens of thousands of dollars .
So with that , Id like to invite onstage Evan Grant , who is one of last years speakers , whos kindly agreed to help me to demonstrate what weve been able to develop .
So the device that you see is a 14 - channel , high - fidelity EEG acquisition system .
It doesnt require any scalp preparation , no conductive gel or paste .
It only takes a few minutes to put on and for the signals to settle .
Its also wireless , so it gives you the freedom to move around .
And compared to the tens of thousands of dollars for a traditional EEG system , this headset only costs a few hundred dollars .
Now on to the detection algorithms .
So facial expressions  -  -  as I mentioned before in emotional experiences  -  -  are actually designed to work out of the box with some sensitivity adjustments available for personalization .
But with the limited time we have available , Id like to show you the cognitive suite , which is the ability for you to basically move virtual objects with your mind .
Now , Evan is new to this system , so what we have to do first is create a new profile for him .
Hes obviously not Joanne  -  -  so well  add user . 
Evan . Okay .
So the first thing we need to do with the cognitive suite is to start with training a neutral signal .
With neutral , theres nothing in particular that Evan needs to do .
He just hangs out . Hes relaxed .
And the idea is to establish a baseline or normal state for his brain , because every brain is different .
It takes eight seconds to do this , and now that thats done , we can choose a movement - based action .
So Evan , choose something that you can visualize clearly in your mind .
Evan Grant : Lets do  pull . 
Tan Le : Okay , so lets choose  pull . 
So the idea here now is that Evan needs to imagine the object coming forward into the screen , and theres a progress bar that will scroll across the screen while hes doing that .
The first time , nothing will happen , because the system has no idea how he thinks about  pull . 
But maintain that thought for the entire duration of the eight seconds .
So : one , two , three , go .
Okay .
So once we accept this , the cube is live .
So lets see if Evan can actually try and imagine pulling .
Ah , good job !
Thats really amazing .
So we have a little bit of time available , so Im going to ask Evan to do a really difficult task .
And this one is difficult because its all about being able to visualize something that doesnt exist in our physical world .
This is  disappear . 
So what you want to do  -  -  at least with movement - based actions , we do that all the time , so you can visualize it .
But with  disappear ,  theres really no analogies  -  -  so Evan , what you want to do here is to imagine the cube slowly fading out , okay .
Same sort of drill . So : one , two , three , go .
Okay . Lets try that .
Oh , my goodness . Hes just too good .
Lets try that again .
EG : Losing concentration .
TL : But we can see that it actually works , even though you can only hold it As I said , its a very difficult process to imagine this .
And the great thing about it is that weve only given the software one instance of how he thinks about  disappear . 
As there is a machine learning algorithm in this  -  -  Thank you .
Good job . Good job .
Thank you , Evan , youre a wonderful , wonderful example of the technology .
So , as you can see , before , there is a leveling system built into this software so that as Evan , or any user , becomes more familiar with the system , they can continue to add more and more detections , so that the system begins to differentiate between different distinct thoughts .
And once youve trained up the detections , these thoughts can be assigned or mapped to any computing platform , application or device .
So Id like to show you a few examples , because there are many possible applications for this new interface .
In games and virtual worlds , for example , your facial expressions can naturally and intuitively be used to control an avatar or virtual character .
Obviously , you can experience the fantasy of magic and control the world with your mind .
And also , colors , lighting , sound and effects can dynamically respond to your emotional state to heighten the experience that youre having , in real time .
And moving on to some applications developed by developers and researchers around the world , with robots and simple machines , for example  -  -  in this case , flying a toy helicopter simply by thinking  lift  with your mind .
The technology can also be applied to real world applications  -  -  in this example , a smart home .
You know , from the user interface of the control system to opening curtains or closing curtains .
And of course , also to the lighting  -  -  turning them on or off .
And finally , to real life - changing applications , such as being able to control an electric wheelchair .
In this example , facial expressions are mapped to the movement commands .
Now blink right to go right .
Now blink left to turn back left .
Now smile to go straight .
TL : We really  -  -  Thank you .
We are really only scratching the surface of what is possible today , and with the communitys input , and also with the involvement of developers and researchers from around the world , we hope that you can help us to shape where the technology goes from here . Thank you so much .
Madeleine Albright : On being a woman and a diplomat
Former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright talks bluntly about politics and diplomacy , making the case that womens issues deserve a place at the center of foreign policy . Far from being a  soft  issue , she says , womens issues are often the very hardest ones , dealing directly with life and death . A frank and funny Q and A with Pat Mitchell from the Paley Center .
Pat Mitchell : What is the story of this pin ?
Madeleine Albright : This is  Breaking the Glass Ceiling . 
PM : Oh .
That was well chosen , I would say , for TEDWomen .
Most of the time I spend when I get up in the morning is trying to figure out what is going to happen .
And none of this pin stuff would have happened if it hadnt been for Saddam Hussein .
Ill tell you what happened .
I went to the United Nations as an ambassador , and it was after the Gulf War , and I was an instructed ambassador .
And the cease - fire had been translated into a series of sanctions resolutions , and my instructions were to say perfectly terrible things about Saddam Hussein constantly , which he deserved  -  -  he had invaded another country .
And so all of a sudden , a poem appeared in the papers in Baghdad comparing me to many things , but among them an  unparalleled serpent . 
And so I happened to have a snake pin .
So I wore it when we talked about Iraq .
And when I went out to meet the press , they zeroed in , said ,  Why are you wearing that snake pin ? 
I said ,  Because Saddam Hussein compared me to an unparalleled serpent . 
And then I thought , well this is fun .
So I went out and I bought a lot of pins that would , in fact , reflect what I thought we were going to do on any given day .
So thats how it all started .
PM : So how large is the collection ?
Pretty big .
Its now traveling .
At the moment its in Indianapolis , but it was at the Smithsonian .
And it goes with a book that says ,  Read My Pins . 
PM : So is this a good idea .
I remember when you were the first woman as Secretary of State , and there was a lot of conversation always about what you were wearing , how you looked  -  -  the thing that happens to a lot of women , especially if theyre the first in a position .
So how do you feel about that  -  -  the whole  -  -  Well , its pretty irritating actually because nobody ever describes what a man is wearing .
But people did pay attention to what clothes I had .
What was interesting was that , before I went up to New York as U.N . ambassador , I talked to Jeane Kirkpatrick , whod been ambassador before me , and she said ,  Youve got to get rid of your professor clothes .
Go out and look like a diplomat . 
So that did give me a lot of opportunities to go shopping .
But still , there were all kinds of questions about  -  -   did you wear a hat ?   How short was your skirt ? 
And one of the things  -  -  if you remember Condoleezza Rice was at some event and she wore boots , and she got criticized over that .
And no guy ever gets criticized . But thats the least of it .
PM : It is , for all of us , men and women , finding our ways of defining our roles , and doing them in ways that make a difference in the world and shape the future .
How did you handle that balance between being the tough diplomatic and strong voice of this country to the rest of the world and also how you felt about yourself as a mother , a grandmother , nurturing ...
and so how did you handle that ?
Well the interesting part was I was asked what it was like to be the first woman Secretary of State a few minutes after Id been named .
And I said ,  Well Ive been a woman for 60 years , but Ive only been Secretary of State for a few minutes . 
So it evolved .
But basically I love being a woman .
And so what happened  -  -  and I think there will probably be some people in the audience that will identify with this  -  -  I went to my first meeting , first at the U.N . , and thats when this all started , because that is a very male organization .
And Im sitting there  -  -  there are 15 members of the Security Council  -  -  so 14 men sat there staring at me , and I thought  -  -  well you know how we all are .
You want to get the feeling of the room , and  do people like me ? 
and  will I really say something intelligent ? 
And all of a sudden I thought ,  Well , wait a minute .
I am sitting behind a sign that says The United States , and if I dont speak today then the voice of the United States will not be heard ,  and it was the first time that I had that feeling that I had to step out of myself in my normal , reluctant female mode and decide that I had to speak on behalf of our country .
And so that happened more at various times , but I really think that there was a great advantage in many ways to being a woman .
I think we are a lot better at personal relationships , and then have the capability obviously of telling it like it is when its necessary .
But I have to tell you , I have my youngest granddaughter , when she turned seven last year , said to her mother , my daughter ,  So whats the big deal about Grandma Maddie being Secretary of State ?
Only girls are Secretary of State . 
PM : Because in her lifetime  -  -  That would be so .
PM : What a change that is .
As you travel now all over the world , which you do frequently , how do you assess this global narrative around the story of women and girls ?
Where are we ?
I think were slowly changing , but obviously there are whole pockets in countries where nothing is different .
And therefore it means that we have to remember that , while many of us have had huge opportunities  -  -  and Pat , you have been a real leader in your field  -  -  is that there are a lot of women that are not capable of worrying and taking care of themselves and understanding that women have to help other women .
And so what I have felt  -  -  and I have looked at this from a national security issue  -  -  when I was Secretary of State , I decided that womens issues had to be central to American foreign policy , not just because Im a feminist , but because I believe that societies are better off when women are politically and economically empowered , that values are passed down , the health situation is better , education is better , there is greater economic prosperity .
So I think that it behooves us  -  -  those of us that live in various countries where we do have economic and political voice  -  -  that we need to help other women .
And I really dedicated myself to that , both at the U.N . and then as Secretary of State .
PM : And did you get pushback from making that a central tenant of foreign policy ?
From some people .
I think that they thought that it was a soft issue .
The bottom line that I decided was actually womens issues are the hardest issues , because they are the ones that have to do with life and death in so many aspects , and because , as I said , it is really central to the way that we think about things .
Now for instance , some of the wars that took place when I was in office , a lot of them , the women were the main victims of it .
For instance , when I started , there were wars in the Balkans .
The women in Bosnia were being raped .
We then managed to set up a war crimes tribunal to deal specifically with those kinds of issues .
And by the way , one of the things that I did at that stage was , I had just arrived at the U.N . , and when I was there , there were 183 countries in the U.N .
Now there are 192 .
But it was one of the first times that I didnt have to cook lunch myself .
So I said to my assistant ,  Invite the other women permanent representatives . 
And I thought when Id get to my apartment that thered be a lot of women there .
I get there , and there are six other women , out of 183 .
So the countries that had women representatives were Canada , Kazakhstan , Philippines , Trinidad Tobago , Jamaica , Lichtenstein and me .
So being an American , I decided to set up a caucus .
And so we set it up , and we called ourselves the G7 .
PM : Is that  Girl 7 ?  Girl 7 .
And we lobbied on behalf of womens issues .
So we managed to get two women judges on this war crimes tribunal .
And then what happened was that they were able to declare that rape was a weapon of war , that it was against humanity .
PM : So when you look around the world and you see that , in many cases  -  -  certainly in the Western world  -  -  women are evolving into more leadership positions , and even other places some barriers are being brought down , but theres still so much violence , still so many problems , and yet we hear there are more women at the negotiating tables .
Now you were at those negotiating tables when they werent , when there was maybe you  -  -  one voice , maybe one or two others .
Do you believe , and can you tell us why , there is going to be a significant shift in things like violence and peace and conflict and resolution on a sustainable basis ?
Well I do think , when there are more women , that the tone of the conversation changes , and also the goals of the conversation change .
But it doesnt mean that the whole world would be a lot better if it were totally run by women .
If you think that , youve forgotten high school .
But the bottom line is that there is a way , when there are more women at the table , that theres an attempt to develop some understanding .
So for instance , what I did when I went to Burundi , wed got Tutsi and Hutu women together to talk about some of the problems that had taken place in Rwanda .
And so I think the capability of women to put themselves  -  -  I think were better about putting ourselves into the other guys shoes and having more empathy .
I think it helps in terms of the support if there are other women in the room .
When I was Secretary of State , there were only 13 other women foreign ministers .
And so it was nice when one of them would show up .
For instance , she is now the president of Finland , but Tarja Halonen was the foreign minister of Finland and , at a certain stage , head of the European Union .
And it was really terrific .
Because one of the things I think youll understand .
We went to a meeting , and the men in my delegation , when I would say ,  Well I feel we should do something about this ,  and theyd say ,  What do you mean , you feel ? 
And so then Tarja was sitting across the table from me .
And all of a sudden we were talking about arms control , and she said ,  Well I feel we should do this . 
And my male colleagues kind of got it all of a sudden .
But I think it really does help to have a critical mass of women in a series of foreign policy positions .
The other thing that I think is really important : A lot of national security policy isnt just about foreign policy , but its about budgets , military budgets , and how the debts of countries work out .
So if you have women in a variety of foreign policy posts , they can support each other when there are budget decisions being made in their own countries .
PM : So how do we get this balance were looking for , then , in the world ?
More womens voices at the table ?
More men who believe that the balance is best ?
Well I think one of the things  -  -  Im chairman of the board of an organization called the National Democratic Institute that works to support women candidates .
I think that we need to help in other countries to train women to be in political office , to figure out how they can in fact develop political voices .
I think we also need to be supportive when businesses are being created and just make sure that women help each other .
Now I have a saying that I feel very strongly about , because I am of a certain age where , when I started in my career , believe it or not , there were other women who criticized me :  Why arent you in the carpool line ? 
or  Arent your children suffering because youre not there all the time ? 
And I think we have a tendency to make each other feel guilty .
In fact , I think  guilt  is every womans middle name .
And so I think what needs to happen is we need to help each other .
And my motto is that theres a special place in hell for women who dont help each other .
PM : Well Secretary Albright , I guess youll be going to heaven .
Thank you for joining us today .
Thank you all . Thanks Pat .
Eric Giler : A demo of wireless electricity
Eric Giler wants to untangle our wired lives with cable - free electric power . Here , he covers what this sci - fi tech offers , and demos MITs breakthrough version , WiTricity  -  -  a near - to - market invention that may soon recharge your cell phone , car , pacemaker .
Early visions of wireless power actually were thought of by Nikola Tesla basically about 100 years ago .
The thought that you wouldnt want to transfer electric power wirelessly , no one ever thought of that .
They thought ,  Who would use it if you didnt ? 
And so , in fact , he actually set about doing a variety of things .
Built the Tesla coil . This tower was built on Long Island back at the beginning of the 1900s .
And the idea was , it was supposed to be able to transfer power anywhere on Earth .
Well never know if this stuff worked . Actually , I think the Federal Bureau of Investigation took it down for security purposes , sometime in the early 1900s .
But the one thing that did come out of electricity is that we love this stuff so much .
I mean , think about how much we love this .
If you just walk outside , there are trillions of dollars that have been invested in infrastructure around the world , putting up wires to get power from where its created to where its used .
The other thing is , we love batteries .
And for those of us that have an environmental element to us , there is something like 40 billion disposable batteries built every year for power that , generally speaking , is used within a few inches or a few feet of where there is very inexpensive power .
So , before I got here , I thought ,  You know , I am from North America .
We do have a little bit of a reputation in the United States . 
So I thought Id better look it up first .
So definition number six is the North American definition of the word  suck . 
Wires suck , they really do .
Think about it . Whether thats you in that picture or something under your desk .
The other thing is , batteries suck too .
And they really , really do .
Do you ever wonder what happens to this stuff ?
40 billion of these things built .
This is what happens .
They fall apart , they disintegrate , and they end up here .
So when you talk about expensive power , the cost per kilowatt - hour to supply battery power to something is on the order of two to three hundred pounds .
Think about that .
The most expensive grid power in the world is thousandths of that .
So fortunately , one of the other definitions of  suck  that was in there , it does create a vacuum .
And nature really does abhor a vacuum .
What happened back a few years ago was a group of theoretical physicists at MIT actually came up with this concept of transferring power over distance .
Basically they were able to light a 60 watt light bulb at a distance of about two meters .
It got about 50 percent of the efficiency  -  -  by the way , thats still a couple thousand times more efficient than a battery would be , to do the same thing .
But were able to light that , and do it very successfully .
This was actually the experiment . So you can see the coils were somewhat larger .
The light bulb was a fairly simple task , from their standpoint .
This all came from a professor waking up at night to the third night in a row that his wifes cellphone was beeping because it was running out of battery power .
And he was thinking ,  With all the electricity thats out there in the walls , why couldnt some of that just come into the phone so I could get some sleep ? 
And he actually came up with this concept of resonant energy transfer .
But inside a standard transformer are two coils of wire .
And those two coils of wire are really , really close to each other , and actually do transfer power magnetically and wirelessly , only over a very short distance .
What Dr . Soljacic figured out how to do was separate the coils in a transformer to a greater distance than the size of those transformers using this technology , which is not dissimilar from the way an opera singer shatters a glass on the other side of the room .
Its a resonant phenomenon for which he actually received a MacArthur Fellowship Award , which is nicknamed the Genius Award , last September , for his discovery .
So how does it work ?
Imagine a coil . For those of you that are engineers , theres a capacitor attached to it too .
And if you can cause that coil to resonate , what will happen is it will pulse at alternating current frequencies  -  -  at a fairly high frequency , by the way .
And if you can bring another device close enough to the source , that will only work at exactly that frequency , you can actually get them to do whats called strongly couple , and transfer magnetic energy between them .
And then what you do is , you start out with electricity , turn it into magnetic field , take that magnetic field , turn it back into electricity , and then you can use it .
Number one question I get asked .
I mean , people are worried about cellphones being safe .
You know . What about safety ?
The first thing is this is not a  radiative  technology .
It doesnt radiate .
There arent electric fields here . Its a magnetic field .
It stays within either what we call the source , or within the device .
And actually , the magnetic fields were using are basically about the same as the Earths magnetic field .
We live in a magnetic field .
And the other thing thats pretty cool about the technology is that it only transfers energy to things that work at exactly the same frequency .
And its virtually impossible in nature to make that happen .
Then finally we have governmental bodies everywhere that will regulate everything we do .
Theyve pretty much set field exposure limits , which all of the things in the stuff Ill show you today sort of sit underneath those guidelines .
Mobile electronics .
Home electronics .
Those cords under your desk , I bet everybody here has something that looks like that or those batteries .
There are industrial applications .
And then finally , electric vehicles .
These electric cars are beautiful .
But who is going to want to plug them in ?
Imagine driving into your garage  -  -  weve built a system to do this  -  -  you drive into your garage , and the car charges itself , because there is a mat on the floor thats plugged into the wall .
And it actually causes your car to charge safely and efficiently .
Then theres all kinds of other applications . Implanted medical devices , where people dont have to die of infections anymore if you can seal the thing up .
Credit cards , robot vacuum cleaners .
So what Id like to do is take a couple minutes and show you , actually , how it works .
And what Im going to do is to show you pretty much whats here .
Youve got a coil .
That coil is connected to an R.F . amplifier that creates a high - frequency oscillating magnetic field .
We put one on the back of the television set .
By the way , I do make it look a little bit easier than it is .
Theres lots of electronics and secret sauce and all kinds of intellectual property that go into it .
But then whats going to happen is , it will create a field .
It will cause one to get created on the other side .
And if the demo gods are willing , in about 10 seconds or so we should see it .
The 10 seconds actually are because we  -  -  I dont know if any of you have ever thought about plugging a T.V . in when you use just a cord .
Generally , you have to go over and hit the button . So I thought we put a little computer in it that has to wake up to tell it to do that .
So , Ill plug that in .
It creates a magnetic field here .
It causes one to be created out here .
And as I said , in sort of about 10 seconds we should start to see ...
This is a commercially  -  -  available color television set .
Imagine , you get one of these things . You want to hang them on the wall .
How many people want to hang them on the wall ?
Think about it . You dont want those ugly cords coming down .
Imagine if you can get rid of it .
The other thing I wanted to talk about was safety .
So , there is nothing going on . Im okay .
And Ill do it again , just for safetys sake .
Almost immediately , though , people ask ,  How small can you make this ? Can you make this small enough ? 
Because remember Dr . Soljacics original idea was his wifes cellphone beeping .
So , I wanted to show you something .
Were an equal opportunity designer of this sort of thing .
This a Google G1 .
You know , its the latest thing thats come out .
It runs the Android operating system .
I think I heard somebody talk about that before .
Its odd . It has a battery .
It also has coiled electronics that WiTricity has put into the back of it .
And if I can get the camera  -  -  okay , great  -  -  youll see , as I get sort of close ...
youre looking at a cellphone powered completely wirelessly .
And I know some of you are Apple aficionados .
So , you know they dont make it easy at Apple to get inside their phones .
So we put a little sleeve on the back , but we should be able to get this guy to wake up too .
And those of you that have an IPhonerecognize the green center .
And Nokia as well .
Youll see that what we did there is put a little thing in the back , to do that , and it probably beeps , actually , as it goes on as well .
But they typically use it to light up the screen .
So , imagine these things could go ... they could go in your ceiling .
They could go in the floor . They could go , actually , underneath your desktop .
So that when you walk in or you come in from home , if you carry a purse , it works in your purse .
You never have to worry about plugging these things in again .
And think of what that would do for you .
So I think in closing , sort of in the immortal visions of The New Yorker magazine , I thought Id put up one more slide .
And for those of you who cant read it , it says ,  It does appear to be some kind of wireless technology . 
So , thank you very much .
Rob Dunbar : Discovering ancient climates in oceans and ice
Rob Dunbar hunts for data on our climate from 12,000 years ago , finding clues inside ancient seabeds and corals and inside ice sheets . His work is vital in setting baselines for fixing our current climate  -  -  and in tracking the rise of deadly ocean acidification .
If you really want to understand the problem that were facing with the oceans , you have to think about the biology at the same time you think about the physics .
We cant solve the problems unless we start studying the ocean in a very much more interdisciplinary way .
So Im going to demonstrate that through discussion of some of the climate change things that are going on in the ocean .
Well look at sea level rise .
Well look at ocean warming .
And then the last thing on the list there , ocean acidification  -  -  if you were to ask me , you know ,  What do you worry about the most ?
What frightens you ? 
for me , its ocean acidification .
And this has come onto the stage pretty recently .
So I will spend a little time at the end .
I was in Copenhagen in December like a number of you in this room .
And I think we all found it , simultaneously , an eye - opening and a very frustrating experience .
I sat in this large negotiation hall , at one point , for three or four hours , without hearing the word  oceans  one time .
It really wasnt on the radar screen .
The nations that brought it up when we had the speeches of the national leaders  -  -  it tended to be the leaders of the small island states , the low - lying island states .
And by this weird quirk of alphabetical order of the nations , a lot of the low - lying states , like Kiribati and Nauru , they were seated at the very end of these immensely long rows .
You know , they were marginalized in the negotiation room .
One of the problems is coming up with the right target .
Its not clear what the target should be .
And how can you figure out how to fix something if you dont have a clear target ?
Now , youve heard about  two degrees  : that we should limit temperature rise to no more than two degrees .
But theres not a lot of science behind that number .
Weve also talked about concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere .
Should it be 450 ? Should it be 400 ?
Theres not a lot of science behind that one either .
Most of the science that is behind these numbers , these potential targets , is based on studies on land .
And I would say , for the people that work in the ocean and think about what the targets should be , we would argue that they must be much lower .
You know , from an oceanic perspective , 450 is way too high .
Now theres compelling evidence that it really needs to be 350 .
We are , right now , at 390 parts per million of CO2 in the atmosphere .
Were not going to put the brakes on in time to stop at 450 , so weve got to accept were going to do an overshoot , and the discussion as we go forward has to focus on how far the overshoot goes and whats the pathway back to 350 .
Now , why is this so complicated ?
Why dont we know some of these things a little bit better ?
Well , the problem is that weve got very complicated forces in the climate system .
Theres all kinds of natural causes of climate change .
Theres air - sea interactions .
Here in Galapagos , were affected by El Ninos and La Nina .
But the entire planet warms up when theres a big El Nino .
Volcanoes eject aerosols into the atmosphere .
That changes our climate .
The ocean contains most of the exchangeable heat on the planet .
So anything that influences how ocean surface waters mix with the deep water changes the ocean of the planet .
And we know the solar outputs not constant through time .
So those are all natural causes of climate change .
And then we have the human - induced causes of climate change as well .
Were changing the characteristics of the surface of the land , the reflectivity .
We inject our own aerosols into the atmosphere , and we have trace gases , and not just carbon dioxide  -  -  its methane , ozone , oxides of sulfur and nitrogen .
So heres the thing . It sounds like a simple question .
Is CO2 produced by mans activities causing the planet to warm up ?
But to answer that question , to make a clear attribution to carbon dioxide , you have to know something about all of these other agents of change .
But the fact is we do know a lot about all of those things .
You know , thousands of scientists have been working on understanding all of these man - made causes and the natural causes .
And weve got it worked out , and we can say ,  Yes , CO2 is causing the planet to warm up now . 
Now , we have many ways to study natural variability .
Ill show you a few examples of this now .
This is the ship that I spent the last three months on in the Antarctic .
Its a scientific drilling vessel .
We go out for months at a time and drill into the sea bed to recover sediments that tell us stories of climate change , right .
Like one of the ways to understand our greenhouse future is to drill down in time to the last period where we had CO2 double what it is today .
And so thats what weve done with this ship .
This was  -  -  this is south of the Antarctic Circle .
It looks downright tropical there .
One day where we had calm seas and sun , which was the reason I could get off the ship .
Most of the time it looked like this .
We had a waves up to 50 ft .
and winds averaging about 40 knots for most of the voyage and up to 70 or 80 knots .
So that trip just ended , and I cant show you too many results from that right now , but well go back one more year , to another drilling expedition Ive been involved in .
This was led by Ross Powell and Tim Naish .
Its the ANDRILL project .
And we made the very first bore hole through the largest floating ice shelf on the planet .
This is a crazy thing , this big drill rig wrapped in a blanket to keep everybody warm , drilling at temperatures of minus 40 .
And we drilled in the Ross Sea .
Thats the Ross Sea Ice Shelf on the right there .
So , this huge floating ice shelf the size of Alaska comes from West Antarctica .
Now , West Antarctica is the part of the continent where the ice is grounded on sea floor as much as 2,000 meters deep .
So that ice sheet is partly floating , and its exposed to the ocean , to the ocean heat .
This is the part of Antarctica that we worry about .
Because its partly floating , you can imagine , is sea level rises a little bit , the ice lifts off the bed , and then it can break off and float north .
When that ice melts , sea level rises by six meters .
So we drill back in time to see how often thats happened , and exactly how fast that ice can melt .
Heres the cartoon on the left there .
We drilled through a hundred meters of floating ice shelf then through 900 meters of water and then 1,300 meters into the sea floor .
So its the deepest geological bore hole ever drilled .
It took about 10 years to put this project together .
And heres what we found .
Now , theres 40 scientists working on this project , and people are doing all kinds of really complicated and expensive analyses .
But it turns out , you know , the thing that told the best story was this simple visual description .
You know , we saw this in the core samples as they came up .
We saw these alternations between sediments that look like this  -  -  theres gravel and cobbles in there and a bunch of sand .
Thats the kind of material in the deep sea .
It can only get there if its carried out by ice .
So we know theres an ice shelf overhead .
And that alternates with a sediment that looks like this .
This is absolutely beautiful stuff .
This sediment is 100 percent made up of the shells of microscopic plants .
And these plants need sunlight , so we know when we find that sediment theres no ice overhead .
And we saw about 35 alternations between open water and ice - covered water , between gravels and these plant sediments .
So what that means is , what it tells us is that the Ross Sea region , this ice shelf , melted back and formed anew about 35 times .
And this is in the past four million years .
This was completely unexpected .
Nobody imagined that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet was this dynamic .
In fact , the lore for many years has been ,  The ice formed many tens of millions of years ago , and its been there ever since . 
And now we know that in our recent past it melted back and formed again , and sea level went up and down , six meters at a time .
What caused it ?
Well , were pretty sure that its very small changes in the amount of sunlight reaching Antarctica , just caused by natural changes in the orbit of the Earth .
But heres the key thing : you know , the other thing we found out is that the ice sheet passed a threshold , that the planet warmed up enough  -  -  and the numbers about one degree to one and a half degrees Centigrade  -  -  the planet warmed up enough that it became ...
that ice sheet became very dynamic and was very easily melted .
And you know what ?
Weve actually changed the temperature in the last century just the right amount .
So many of us are convinced now that West Antarctica , the West Antarctic Ice Sheet , is starting to melt .
We do expect to see a sea - level rise on the order of one to two meters by the end of this century .
And it could be larger than that .
This is a serious consequence for nations like Kiribati , you know , where the average elevation is about a little over a meter above sea level .
Okay , the second story takes place here in Galapagos .
This is a bleached coral , coral that died during the 1982 -  83 El Nino .
This is from Champion Island .
Its about a meter tall Pavona clavus colony .
And its covered with algae . Thats what happens .
When these things die , immediately , organisms come in and encrust and live on that dead surface .
And so , when a coral colony is killed by an El Nino event , it leaves this indelible record .
You can go then and study corals and figure out how often do you see this .
So one of the things thought of in the 80s was to go back and take cores of coral heads throughout the Galapagos and find out how often was there a devastating event .
And just so you know , 1982 -  83 , that El Nino killed 95 percent of all the corals here in Galapagos .
Then there was similar mortality in 97 -  98 .
And what we found after drilling back in time two to 400 years was that these were unique events .
We saw no other mass mortality events .
So these events in our recent past really are unique .
So theyre either just truly monster El Ninos , or theyre just very strong El Ninos that occurred against a backdrop of global warming .
Either case , its bad news for the corals of the Galapagos Islands .
Heres how we sample the corals .
This is actually Easter Island . Look at this monster .
This coral is eight meters tall , right .
And it been growing for about 600 years .
Now , Sylvia Earle turned me on to this exact same coral .
And she was diving here with John Lauret  -  -  I think it was 1994  -  -  and collected a little nugget and sent it to me .
And we started working on it , and we figured out we could tell the temperature of the ancient ocean from analyzing a coral like this .
So we have a diamond drill .
Were not killing the colony ; were taking a small core sample out of the top .
The core comes up as these cylindrical tubes of limestone .
And that material then we take back to the lab and analyze it .
You can see some of the coral cores there on the right .
So weve done that all over the Eastern Pacific .
Were starting to do it in the Western Pacific as well .
Ill take you back here to the Galapagos Islands .
And weve been working at this fascinating uplift here in Urbina Bay .
That the place where , during an earthquake in 1954 , this marine terrace was lifted up out of the ocean very quickly , and it was lifted up about six to seven meters .
And so now you can walk through a coral reef without getting wet .
If you go on the ground there , it looks like this , and this is the grandaddy coral .
Its 11 meters in diameter , and we know that it started growing in the year 1584 .
Imagine that .
And that coral was growing happily in those shallow waters , until 1954 , when the earthquake happened .
Now the reason we know its 1584 is that these corals have growth bands .
When you cut them , slice those cores in half and x - ray them , you see these light and dark bands .
Each one of those is a year .
We know these corals grow about a centimeter and a half a year .
And we just count on down to the bottom .
Then their other attribute is that they have this great chemistry .
We can analyze the carbonate that makes up the coral , and theres a whole bunch of things we can do .
But in this case , we measured the different isotopes of oxygen .
Their ratio tells us the water temperature .
In this example here , we had monitored this reef in Galapagos with temperature recorders , so we know the temperature of the water the corals growing in .
Then after we harvest a coral , we measure this ratio , and now you can see , those curves match perfectly .
In this case , at these islands , you know , corals are instrumental - quality recorders of change in the water .
And of course , our thermometers only take us back 50 years or so here .
The coral can take us back hundreds and thousands of years .
So , what we do : weve merged a lot of different data sets .
Its not just my group ; theres maybe 30 groups worldwide doing this .
But we get these instrumental -  and near - instrumental - quality records of temperature change that go back hundreds of years , and we put them together .
Heres a synthetic diagram .
Theres a whole family of curves here .
But whats happening : were looking at the last thousand years of temperature on the planet .
And theres five or six different compilations there , But each one of those compilations reflects input from hundreds of these kinds of records from corals .
We do similar things with ice cores .
We work with tree rings .
And thats how we discover what is truly natural and how different is the last century , right ?
And I chose this one because its complicated and messy looking , right .
This is as messy as it gets .
You can see theres some signals there .
Some of the records show lower temperatures than others .
Some of them show greater variability .
But they all tell us what the natural variability is .
Some of them are from the northern hemisphere ; some are from the entire globe .
But heres what we can say : whats natural in the last thousand years is that the planet was cooling down .
It was cooling down until about 1900 or so .
And there is natural variability caused by the Sun , caused by El Ninos .
A century - scale , decadal - scale variability , and we know the magnitude ; its about two - tenths to four - tenths of a degree Centigrade .
But then at the very end is where we have the instrumental record in black .
And theres the temperature up there in 2009 .
You know , weve warmed the globe about a degree Centigrade in the last century , and theres nothing in the natural part of that record that resembles what weve seen in the last century .
You know , thats the strength of our argument , that we are doing something thats truly different .
So Ill close with a short discussion of ocean acidification .
I like it as a component of global change to talk about , because , even if you are a hard - bitten global warming skeptic , and I talk to that community fairly often , you can not deny the simple physics of CO2 dissolving in the ocean .
You know , were pumping out lots of CO2 into the atmosphere , from fossil fuels , from cement production .
Right now , about a third of that carbon dioxide is dissolving straight into the sea , right ?
And as it does so , it makes the ocean more acidic .
So , you can not argue with that .
That is whats happening right now , and its a very different issue than the global warming issue .
It has many consequences .
Theres consequences for carbonate organisms .
There are many organisms that build their shells out of calcium carbonate  -  -  plants and animals both .
The main framework material of coral reefs is calcium carbonate .
That material is more soluble in acidic fluid .
So one of the things were seeing is organisms are having to spend more metabolic energy to build and maintain their shells .
At some point , as this transience , as this CO2 uptake in the ocean continues , that materials actually going to start to dissolve .
And on coral reefs , where some of the main framework organisms disappear , we will see a major loss of marine biodiversity .
But its not just the carbonate producers that are affected .
Theres many physiological processes that are influenced by the acidity of the ocean .
So many reactions involving enzymes and proteins are sensitive to the acid content of the ocean .
So , all of these things  -  -  greater metabolic demands , reduced reproductive success , changes in respiration and metabolism .
You know , these are things that we have good physiological reasons to expect to see stressed caused by this transience .
So we figured out some pretty interesting ways to track CO2 levels in the atmosphere , going back millions of years .
We used to do it just with ice cores , but in this case , were going back 20 million years .
And we take samples of the sediment , and it tells us the CO2 level of the ocean , and therefore the CO2 level of the atmosphere .
And heres the thing : you have to go back about 15 million years to find a time when CO2 levels were about what they are today .
You have to go back about 30 million years to find a time when CO2 levels were double what they are today .
Now , what that means is that all of the organisms that live in the sea have evolved in this chemostatted ocean , with CO2 levels lower than they are today .
Thats the reason that theyre not able to respond or adapt to this rapid acidification thats going on right now .
So , Charlie Veron came up with this statement last year :  The prospect of ocean acidification may well be the most serious of all of the predicted outcomes of anthropogenic CO2 release . 
And I think that may very well be true , so Ill close with this .
You know , we do need the protected areas , absolutely , but for the sake of the oceans , we have to cap or limit CO2 emissions as soon as possible .
Thank you very much .
John Underkoffler : Pointing to the future of UI
Minority Report science adviser and inventor John Underkoffler demos g - speak  -  -  the real - life version of the films eye - popping , tai chi - meets - cyberspace computer interface . Is this how tomorrows computers will be controlled ?
Were 25 , 26 years after the advent of the Macintosh , which was an astoundingly seminal event in the history of human - machine interface and in computation in general .
It fundamentally changed the way that people thought about computation , thought about computers , how they used them and who and how many people were able to use them .
It was such a radical change , in fact , that the early Macintosh development team in 82 , 83 , 84 had to write an entirely new operating system from the ground up .
Now , this is an interesting little message , and its a lesson that has since , I think , been forgotten or lost or something , and that is , namely , that the OS is the interface .
The interface is the OS .
Its like the land and the king theyre inseparable , they are one .
And to write a new operating system was not a capricious matter .
It wasnt just a matter of tuning up some graphics routines .
There were no graphics routines . There were no mouse drivers .
So it was a necessity .
But in the quarter - century since then , weve seen all of the fundamental supporting technologies go berserk .
So memory capacity and disk capacity have been multiplied by something between 10,000 and a million .
Same thing for processor speeds .
Networks , we didnt have networks at all at the time of the Macintoshs introduction , and that has become the single most salient aspect of how we live with computers .
And , of course , graphics : Today 84 dollars and 97 cents at Best Buy buys you more graphics power than you could have gotten for a million bucks from SGI only a decade ago .
So weve got that incredible ramp - up .
Then , on the side , weve got the Web and , increasingly , the cloud , which is fantastic , but also  -  -  in the regard in which an interface is fundamental  -  -  kind of a distraction .
So weve forgotten to invent new interfaces .
Certainly weve seen in recent years a lot of change in that regard , and people are starting to wake up about that .
So what happens next ? Where do we go from there ?
The problem , as we see it , has to do with a single , simple word :  space ,  or a single , simple phrase :  real world geometry . 
Computers and the programming languages that we talk to them in , that we teach them in , are hideously insensate when it comes to space .
They dont understand real world space .
Its a funny thing because the rest of us occupy it quite frequently and quite well .
They also dont understand time , but thats a matter for a separate talk .
So what happens if you start to explain space to them ?
One thing you might get is something like the Luminous Room .
The Luminous Room is a system in which its considered that input and output spaces are co - located .
Thats a strangely simple , and yet unexplored idea , right ?
When you use a mouse , your hand is down here on the mouse pad .
Its not even on the same plane as what youre talking about : The pixels are up on the display .
So here was a room in which all the walls , floors , ceilings , pets , potted plants , whatever was in there , were capable , not only of display but of sensing as well .
And that means input and output are in the same space enabling stuff like this .
Thats a digital storage in a physical container .
The contract is the same as with real word objects in real world containers .
Has to come back out , whatever you put in .
This little design experiment that was a small office here knew a few other tricks as well .
If you presented it with a chess board , it tried to figure out what you might mean by that .
And if there was nothing for them to do , the chess pieces eventually got bored and hopped away .
The academics who were overseeing this work thought that that was too frivolous , so we built deadly serious applications like this optics prototyping workbench in which a toothpaste cap on a cardboard box becomes a laser .
The beam splitters and lenses are represented by physical objects , and the system projects down the laser beam path .
So youve got an interface that has no interface .
You operate the world as you operate the real world , which is to say , with your hands .
Similarly , a digital wind tunnel with digital wind flowing from right to left  -  -  not that remarkable in a sense ; we didnt invent the mathematics .
But if you displayed that on a CRT or flat panel display , it would be meaningless to hold up an arbitrary object , a real world object in that .
Here , the real world merges with the simulation .
And finally , to pull out all the stops , this is a system called Urp , for urban planners , in which we give architects and urban planners back the models that we confiscated when we insisted that they use CAD systems .
And we make the machine meet them half way .
It projects down digital shadows , as you see here .
And if you introduce tools like this inverse clock , then you can control the suns position in the sky .
Thats 8 a.m . shadows .
They get a little shorter at 9 a.m .
There you are , swinging the sun around .
Short shadows at noon and so forth .
And we built up a series of tools like this .
There are inter - shadowing studies that children can operate , even though they dont know anything about urban planning : To move a building , you simply reach out your hand and you move the building .
A material wand makes the building into a sort of Frank Gehry thing that reflects light in all directions .
Are you blinding passers by and motorists on the freeways ?
A zoning tool connects distant structures , a building and a roadway .
Are you going to get sued by the zoning commission ? And so forth .
Now , if these ideas seem familiar or perhaps even a little dated , thats great ; they should seem familiar .
This work is 15 years old .
This stuff was undertaken at MIT and the Media Lab under the incredible direction of Professor Hiroshi Ishii , director of the Tangible Media Group .
But it was that work that was seen by Alex McDowell , one of the worlds legendary production designers .
But Alex was preparing a little , sort of obscure , indie , arthouse film called  Minority Report  for Steven Spielberg , and invited us to come out from MIT and design the interfaces that would appear in that film .
And the great thing about it was that Alex was so dedicated to the idea of verisimilitude , the idea that the putative 2054 that we were painting in the film be believable , that he allowed us to take on that design work as if it were an R and D effort .
And the result is sort of gratifyingly perpetual .
People still reference those sequences in  Minority Report  when they talk about new UI design .
So this led full circle , in a strange way , to build these ideas into what we believe is the necessary future of human machine interface : the Spatial Operating Environment , we call it .
So here we have a bunch of stuff , some images .
And , using a hand , we can actually exercise six degrees of freedom , six degrees of navigational control .
And its fun to fly through Mr. Becketts eye .
And you can come back out through the scary orangutan .
And thats all well and good .
Lets do something a little more difficult .
Here , we have a whole bunch of disparate images .
We can fly around them .
So navigation is a fundamental issue .
You have to be able to navigate in 3D .
Much of what we want computers to help us with in the first place is inherently spatial .
And the part that isnt spatial can often be spatialized to allow our wetware to make greater sense of it .
Now we can distribute this stuff in many different ways .
So we can throw it out like that . Lets reset it .
We can organize it this way .
And , of course , its not just about navigation , but about manipulation as well .
So if we dont like stuff , or were intensely curious about Ernst Haeckels scientific falsifications , we can pull them out like that .
And then if its time for analysis , we can pull back a little bit and ask for a different distribution .
Lets just come down a bit and fly around .
So thats a different way to look at stuff .
If youre of a more analytical nature then you might want , actually , to look at this as a color histogram .
So now weve got the stuff color - sorted , angle maps onto color .
And now , if we want to select stuff , 3D , space , the idea that were tracking hands in real space becomes really important because we can reach in , not in 2D , not in fake 2D , but in actual 3D .
Here are some selection planes .
And well perform this Boolean operation because we really love yellow and tapirs on green grass .
So , from there to the world of real work .
Heres a logistics system , a small piece of one that were currently building .
Therere a lot of elements .
And one thing thats very important is to combine traditional tabular data with three - dimensional and geospatial information .
So heres a familiar place .
And well bring this back here for a second .
Maybe select a little bit of that .
And bring out this graph .
And we should , now , be able to fly in here and have a closer look .
These are logistics elements that are scattered across the United States .
One thing that three - dimensional interactions and the general idea of imbuing computation with space affords you is a final destruction of that unfortunate one - to - one pairing between human beings and computers .
Thats the old way , thats the old mantra : one machine , one human , one mouse , one screen .
Well , that doesnt really cut it anymore .
In the real world , we have people who collaborate ; we have people who have to work together , and we have many different displays .
And we might want to look at these various images .
We might want to ask for some help .
The author of this new pointing device is sitting over there , so I can pull this from there to there .
These are unrelated machines , right ?
So the computation is space soluble and network soluble .
So Im going to leave that over there because I have a question for Paul .
Paul is the designer of this wand , and maybe its easiest for him to come over here and tell me in person whats going on .
So let me get some of these out of the way .
Lets pull this apart : Ill go ahead and explode it .
Kevin , can you help ?
Let me see if I can help us find the circuit board .
Mind you , its a sort of gratuitous field - stripping exercise , but we do it in the lab all the time .
All right .
So collaborative work , whether its immediately co - located or distant and distinct , is always important .
And again , that stuff needs to be undertaken in the context of space .
And finally , Id like to leave you with a glimpse that takes us back to the world of imagery .
This is a system called TAMPER , which is a slightly whimsical look at what the future of editing and media manipulation systems might be .
We at Oblong believe that media should be accessible in much more fine - grained form .
So we have a large number of movies stuck inside here .
And lets just pick out a few elements .
We can zip through them as a possibility .
We can grab elements off the front , where upon they reanimate , come to life , and drag them down onto the table here .
Well go over to Jacques Tati here and grab our blue friend and put him down on the table as well .
We may need more than one .
And we probably need , well , we probably need a cowboy to be quite honest .
Yeah , lets take that one .
You see , cowboys and French farce people dont go well together , and the system knows that .
Let me leave with one final thought , and that is that one of the greatest English language writers of the last three decades suggested that great art is always a gift .
And he wasnt talking about whether the novel costs 24.95  dollars  , or whether you have to spring 70 million bucks to buy the stolen Vermeer ; he was talking about the circumstances of its creation and of its existence .
And I think that its time that we asked for the same from technology .
Technology is capable of expressing and being imbued with a certain generosity , and we need to demand that , in fact .
For some of this kind of technology , ground center is a combination of design , which is crucially important .
We cant have advances in technology any longer unless design is integrated from the very start .
And , as well , as of efficacy , agency .
Were , as human beings , the creatures that create , and we should make sure that our machines aid us in that task and are built in that same image .
So I will leave you with that . Thank you .
So to ask the obvious question  -  -  actually this is from Bill Gates  -  -  when ?
When real ? When for us , not just in a lab and on a stage ?
Can it be for every man , or is this just for corporations and movie producers ?
JU : No , it has to be for every human being .
Thats our goal entirely .
We wont have succeeded unless we take that next big step .
I mean its been 25 years .
Can there really be only one interface ? There cant .
But does that mean that , at your desk or in your home , you need projectors , cameras ?
You know , how can it work ?
JU : No , this stuff will be built into the bezel of every display .
Itll be built into architecture .
The gloves go away in a matter of months or years .
So this is the inevitability about it .
So , in your mind , five years time , someone can buy this as part of a standard computer interface ?
JU : I think in five years time when you buy a computer , youll get this .
Well thats cool .
The world has a habit of surprising us as to how these things are actually used .
What do you think , what in your mind is the first killer app for this ?
JU : Thats a good question , and we ask ourselves that every day .
At the moment , our early - adopter customers  -  -  and these systems are deployed out in the real world  -  -  do all the big data intensive , data heavy problems with it .
So , whether its logistics and supply chain management or natural gas and resource extraction , financial services , pharmaceuticals , bioinformatics , those are the topics right now , but thats not a killer app .
And I understand what youre asking .
Cmon , cmon . Martial arts , games . Cmon .
John , thank you for making science - fiction real .
JU : Its been a great pleasure .
Thank you to you all .
Caroline Casey : Looking past limits
Activist Caroline Casey tells the story of her extraordinary life , starting with a revelation . In a talk that challenges perceptions , Casey asks us all to move beyond the limits we may think we have .
Can any of you remember what you wanted to be when you were 17 ?
Do you know what I wanted to be ?
I wanted to be a biker chick .
I wanted to race cars , and I wanted to be a cowgirl , and I wanted to be Mowgli from  The Jungle Book . 
Because they were all about being free , the wind in your hair  -  -  just to be free .
And on my seventeenth birthday , my parents , knowing how much I loved speed , gave me one driving lesson for my seventeenth birthday .
Not that we could have afforded I drive , but to give me the dream of driving .
And on my seventeenth birthday , I accompanied my little sister in complete innocence , as I always had all my life  -  -  my visually impaired sister  -  -  to go to see an eye specialist .
Because big sisters are always supposed to support their little sisters .
And my little sister wanted to be a pilot  -  -  God help her .
So I used to get my eyes tested just for fun .
And on my seventeenth birthday , after my fake eye exam , the eye specialist just noticed it happened to be my birthday .
And he said ,  So what are you going to do to celebrate ? 
And I took that driving lesson , and I said ,  Im going to learn how to drive . 
And then there was a silence  -  -  one of those awful silences when you know somethings wrong .
And he turned to my mother , and he said ,  You havent told her yet ? 
On my seventeenth birthday , as Janis Ian would best say , I learned the truth at 17 .
I am , and have been since birth , legally blind .
And you know , how on earth did I get to 17 and not know that ?
Well , if anybody says country music isnt powerful , let me tell you this : I got there because my fathers passion for Johnny Cash and a song ,  A Boy Named Sue . 
Im the eldest of three . I was born in 1971 .
And very shortly after my birth , my parents found out I had a condition called ocular albinism .
And what the hell does that mean to you ?
So let me just tell you , the great part of all of this ?
I cant see this clock and I cant see the timing , so holy God , woohoo !
I might buy some more time .
But more importantly , let me tell you  -  -  Im going to come up really close here . Dont freak out , Pat .
Hey .
See this hand ?
Beyond this hand is a world of Vaseline .
Every man in this room , even you , Steve , is George Clooney .
And every woman , you are so beautiful .
And when I want to look beautiful , I step three feet away from the mirror , and I dont have to see these lines etched in my face from all the squinting Ive done all my life from all the dark lights .
The really strange part is that , at three and a half , just before I was going to school , my parents made a bizarre , unusual and incredibly brave decision .
No special needs schools .
No labels .
No limitations .
My ability and my potential .
And they decided to tell me that I could see .
So just like Johnny Cashs Sue , a boy given a girls name , I would grow up and learn from experience how to be tough and how to survive , when they were no longer there to protect me , or just take it all away .
But more significantly , they gave me the ability to believe , totally , to believe that I could .
And so when I heard that eye specialist tell me all the things , a big fat  no ,  everybody imagines I was devastated .
And dont get me wrong , because when I first heard it  -  -  aside from the fact that I thought he was insane  -  -  I got that thump in my chest , just that  huh ? 
But very quickly I recovered . It was like that .
The first thing I thought about was my mom , who was crying over beside me .
And I swear to God , I walked out of his office ,  I will drive . I will drive .
Youre mad . Ill drive . I know I can drive . 
And with the same dogged determination that my father had bred into me since I was such a child  -  -  he taught me how to sail , knowing I could never see where I was going , I could never see the shore , and I couldnt see the sails , and I couldnt see the destination .
But he told me to believe and feel the wind in my face .
And that wind in my face made me believe that he was mad and I would drive .
And for the next 11 years , I swore nobody would ever find out that I couldnt see , because I didnt want to be a failure , and I didnt want to be weak .
And I believed I could do it .
So I rammed through life as only a Casey can do .
And I was an archeologist , and then I broke things .
And then I managed a restaurant , and then I slipped on things .
And then I was a masseuse . And then I was a landscape gardener .
And then I went to business school .
And you know , disabled people are hugely educated .
And then I went in and I got a global consulting job with Accenture .
And they didnt even know .
And its extraordinary how far belief can take you .
In 1999 , two and a half years into that job , something happened .
Wonderfully , my eyes decided , enough .
And temporarily , very unexpectedly , they dropped .
And Im in one of the most competitive environments in the world , where you work hard , play hard , you gotta be the best , you gotta be the best .
And two years in , I really could see very little .
And I found myself in front of an HR manager in 1999 , saying something I never imagined that I would say .
I was 28 years old .
I had built a persona all around what I could and couldnt do .
And I simply said ,  Im sorry .
I cant see , and I need help . 
Asking for help can be incredibly difficult .
And you all know what it is . You dont need to have a disability to know that .
We all know how hard it is to admit weakness and failure .
And its frightening , isnt it ?
But all that belief had fueled me so long .
And can I tell you , operating in the sighted world when you cant see , its kind of difficult  -  -  it really is .
Can I tell you , airports are a disaster .
Oh , for the love of God .
And please , any designers out there ?
OK , designers , please put up your hands , even though I cant even see you .
I always end up in the gents toilets .
And theres nothing wrong with my sense of smell .
But can I just tell you , the little sign for a gents toilet or a ladies toilet is determined by a triangle .
Have you ever tried to see that if you have Vaseline in front of your eyes ?
Its such a small thing , right ?
And you know how exhausting it can be to try to be perfect when youre not , or to be somebody that you arent ?
And so after admitting I couldnt see to HR , they sent me off to an eye specialist .
And I had no idea that this man was going to change my life .
But before I got to him , I was so lost .
I had no idea who I was anymore .
And that eye specialist , he didnt bother testing my eyes .
God no , it was therapy .
And he asked me several questions , of which many were ,  Why ?
Why are you fighting so hard not to be yourself ?
And do you love what you do , Caroline ? 
And you know , when you go to a global consulting firm , they put a chip in your head , and youre like ,  I love Accenture . I love Accenture . I love my job . I love Accenture .
I love Accenture . I love Accenture . I love my job . I love Accenture . 
To leave would be failure .
And he said ,  Do you love it ? 
I couldnt even speak I was so choked up .
I just was so  -  -  how do I tell him ?
And then he said to me ,  What did you want to be when you were little ? 
Now listen , I wasnt going to say to him ,  Well , I wanted to race cars and motorbikes . 
Hardly appropriate at this moment in time .
He thought I was mad enough anyway .
And as I left his office , he called me back and he said ,  I think its time .
I think its time to stop fighting and do something different . 
And that door closed .
And that silence just outside a doctors office , that many of us know .
And my chest ached .
And I had no idea where I was going . I had no idea .
But I did know the game was up .
And I went home , and , because the pain in my chest ached so much , I thought ,  Ill go out for a run . 
Really not a very sensible thing to do .
And I went on a run that I know so well .
I know this run so well , by the back of my hand .
I always run it perfectly fine .
I count the steps and the lampposts and all those things that visually impaired people have a tendency to have a lot of meetings with .
And there was a rock that I always missed .
And Id never fallen on it , never .
And there I was crying away , and smash , bash on my rock .
Broken , fallen over on this rock in the middle of March in 2000 , typical Irish weather on a Wednesday  -  -  gray , snot , tears everywhere , ridiculously self - pitying .
And I was floored , and I was broken , and I was angry .
And I didnt know what to do .
And I sat there for quite some time going ,  How am I going to get off this rock and go home ?
Because who am I going to be ?
What am I going to be ? 
And I thought about my dad , and I thought ,  Good God , Im so not Sue now . 
And I kept thinking over and over in my mind , what had happened ? Where did it go wrong ? Why didnt I understand ?
And you know , the extraordinary part of it is I just simply had no answers .
I had lost my belief .
Look where my belief had brought me to .
And now I had lost it . And now I really couldnt see .
I was crumpled .
And then I remember thinking about that eye specialist asking me ,  What do you want to be ? What do you want to be ?
What did you want to be when you were little ? Do you love what you do ?
Do something different . What do you want to be ?
Do something different . What do you want to be ? 
And really slowly , slowly , slowly , it happened .
And it did happen this way .
And then the minute it came , it blew up in my head and bashed in my heart  -  -  something different .
 Well , how about Mowgli from The Jungle Book ?
You dont get more different than that . 
And the moment , and I mean the moment , the moment that hit me , I swear to God , it was like woo hoo ! You know  -  -  something to believe in .
And nobody can tell me no .
Yes , you can say I cant be an archeologist .
But you cant tell me , no , I cant be Mowgli , because guess what ?
Nobodys ever done it before , so Im going to go do it .
And it doesnt matter whether Im a boy or a girl , Im just going to scoot .
And so I got off that rock , and , oh my God , did I run home .
And I sprinted home , and I didnt fall , and I didnt crash .
And I ran up the stairs , and there was one of my favorite books of all time ,  Travels on My Elephant  by Mark Shand  -  -  I dont know if any of you know it .
And I grabbed this book off , and Im sitting on the couch going ,  I know what Im going to do .
I know how to be Mowgli .
Im going to go across India on the back of an elephant .
Im going to be an elephant handler . 
And I had no idea how I was going to be an elephant handler .
From global management consultant to elephant handler .
I had no idea how . I had no idea how you hire an elephant , get an elephant .
I didnt speak Hindi . Id never been to India . Hadnt a clue .
But I knew I would .
Because , when you make a decision at the right time and the right place , God , that universe makes it happen for you .
Nine months later , after that day on snot rock , I had the only blind date in my life with a seven and a half foot elephant called Kanchi .
And together we would trek a thousand kilometers across India .
The most powerful thing of all , its not that I didnt achieve before then . Oh my God , I did .
But you know , I was believing in the wrong thing .
Because I wasnt believing in me , really me , all the bits of me  -  -  all the bits of all of us .
Do you know how much of us all pretend to be somebody were not ?
And you know what , when you really believe in yourself and everything about you , its extraordinary what happens .
And you know what , that trip , that thousand kilometers , it raised enough money for 6,000 cataract eye operations .
Six thousand people got to see because of that .
When I came home off that elephant , do you know what the most amazing part was ?
I chucked in my job at Accenture .
I left , and I became a social entrepreneur , and I set up an organization with Mark Shand called Elephant Family , which deals with Asian elephant conservation .
And I set up Kanchi , because my organization was always going to be named after my elephant , because disability is like the elephant in the room .
And I wanted to make you see it in a positive way  -  -  no charity , no pity .
But I wanted to work only and truly with business and media leadership to totally reframe disability in a way that was exciting and possible .
It was extraordinary .
Thats what I wanted to do .
And I never thought about noes anymore , or not seeing , or any of that kind of nothing .
It just seemed that it was possible .
And you know , the oddest part is , when I was on my way traveling here to TED , Ill be honest , I was petrified .
And I speak , but this is an amazing audience , and what am I doing here ?
But as I was traveling here , youll be very happy to know , I did use my white symbol stick cane , because its really good to skip queues in the airport .
And I got my way here being happily proud that I couldnt see .
And the one thing is that a really good friend of mine , he texted me on the way over , knowing I was scared .
Even though I present confident , I was scared .
He said ,  Be you . 
And so here I am .
This is me , all of me .
And I have learned , you know what , cars and motorbikes and elephants , thats not freedom .
Being absolutely true to yourself is freedom .
And I never needed eyes to see  -  -  never .
I simply needed vision and belief .
And if you truly believe  -  -  and I mean believe from the bottom of your heart  -  -  you can make change happen .
And we need to make it happen , because every single one of us  -  -  woman , man , gay , straight , disabled , perfect , normal , whatever  -  -  everyone of us must be the very best of ourselves .
I no longer want anybody to be invisible .
We all have to be included .
And stop with the labels , the limiting .
Losing of labels , because we are not jam jars .
We are extraordinary , different , wonderful people .
Thank you .
Sam Richards : A radical experiment in empathy
By leading the Americans in his audience step by step through the thought process , sociologist Sam Richards sets an extraordinary challenge : can they understand  -  -  not approve of , but understand  -  -  the motivations of an Iraqi insurgent ? And by extension , can anyone truly understand and empathize with another ? 
My students often ask me ,  What is sociology ? 
And I tell them ,  Its the study of the way in which human beings are shaped by things that they dont see . 
And they say ,  So how can I be a sociologist ?
How can I understand those invisible forces ? 
And I say ,  Empathy .
Start with empathy .
It all begins with empathy .
Take yourself out of your shoes , put yourself into the shoes of another person . 
Here , Ill give you an example .
So I imagine my life : if a hundred years ago China had been the most powerful nation in the world and they came to the United States in search of coal , and they found it , and , in fact , they found lots of it right here .
And pretty soon , they began shipping that coal , ton by ton , rail car by rail car , boatload by boatload , back to China and elsewhere around the world .
And they got fabulously wealthy in doing so .
And they built beautiful cities all powered on that coal .
And back here in the United States , we saw economic despair , deprivation .
This is what I saw .
I saw people struggling to get by , not knowing what was what and what was next .
And then I asked myself the question .
I say ,  Hows it possible that we could be so poor here in the United States , because the coal is such a wealthy resource , its so much money ? 
And I realized , because the Chinese ingratiated themselves with a small ruling class here in the United States who stole all of that money and all of that wealth for themselves .
And the rest of us , the vast majority of us , struggle to get by .
And the Chinese gave this small ruling elite loads of military weapons and sophisticated technology in order to ensure that people like me would not speak out against this relationship .
Does this sound familiar ?
And they did things like train Americans to help protect the coal .
And everywhere , were symbols of the Chinese  -  -  everywhere , a constant reminder .
And back in China , what do they say in China ?
Nothing . They dont talk about us . They dont talk about the coal .
If you ask them , theyll say ,  Well , you know the coal , we need the coal .
I mean , come on , Im not going to turn down my thermostat .
You cant expect that . 
And so I get angry , and I get pissed , as do lots of average people .
And we fight back , and it gets really ugly .
And the Chinese respond in a very ugly way .
And before we know it , they send in the tanks and then send in the troops , and lots of people are dying , and its a very , very difficult situation .
Can you imagine what you would feel if you were in my shoes ?
Can you imagine walking out of this building and seeing a tank sitting out there or a truck full of soldiers ?
And just imagine what you would feel .
Because you know why theyre here , and you know what theyre doing here .
And you just feel the anger and you feel the fear .
If you can , thats empathy  -  -  thats empathy .
Youve left your shoes , and youve stood in mine .
And youve got to feel that .
Okay , so thats the warm up .
Thats the warm up .
Now were going to have the real radical experiment .
And so for the remainder of my talk , what I want you to do is put yourselves in the shoes of an ordinary Arab Muslim living in the Middle East  -  -  in particular , in Iraq .
And so to help you , perhaps youre a member of this middle class family in Baghdad  -  -  and what you want is the best for your kids .
You want your kids to have a better life .
And you watch the news , you pay attention , you read the newspaper , you go down to the coffee shop with your friends , and you read the newspapers from around the world .
And sometimes you even watch satellite , CNN , from the United States .
So you have a sense of what the Americans are thinking .
But really , you just want a better life for yourself .
Thats what you want .
Youre Arab Muslim living in Iraq .
You want a better life for yourself .
So here , let me help you .
Let me help you with some things that you might be thinking .
Number one : this incursion into your land these past 20 years , and before , the reason anyone is interested in your land , and particularly the United States , its oil .
Its all about oil ; you know that , everybody knows that .
People here back in the United States know its about oil .
Its because somebody else has a design for your resource .
Its your resource ; its not somebody elses .
Its your land ; its your resource .
Somebody else has a design for it .
And you know why they have a design ?
You know why they have their eyes set on it ?
Because they have an entire economic system thats dependent on that oil  -  -  foreign oil , oil from other parts of the world that they dont own .
And what else do you think about these people ?
The Americans , theyre rich .
Come on , they live in big houses , they have big cars , they all have blond hair , blue eyes , theyre happy .
You think that . Its not true , of course , but thats the media impression , and thats like what you get .
And they have big cities , and the cities are all dependent on oil .
And back home , what do you see ?
Poverty , despair , struggle .
Look , you dont live in a wealthy country .
This is Iraq .
This is what you see .
You see people struggling to get by .
I mean , its not easy ; you see a lot of poverty .
And you feel something about this .
These people have designs for your resource , and this is what you see ?
Something else you see that you talk about  -  -  Americans dont talk about this , but you do .
Theres this thing , this militarization of the world , and its centered right in the United States .
And the United States is responsible for almost one half of the worlds military spending  -  -  four percent of the worlds population .
And you feel it ; you see it every day .
Its part of your life .
And you talk about it with your friends .
You read about it .
And back when Saddam Hussein was in power , the Americans didnt care about his crimes .
When he was gassing the Kurds and gassing Iran , they didnt care about it .
When oil was at stake , somehow , suddenly , things mattered .
And what you see , something else , the United States , the hub of democracy around the world , they dont seem to really be supporting democratic countries all around the world .
There are a lot of countries , oil - producing countries , that arent very democratic , but supported by the United States .
Thats odd .
Oh , these incursions , these two wars , the 10 years of sanctions , the eight years of occupation , the insurgency thats been unleashed on your people , the tens of thousands , the hundreds of thousands of civilian deaths , all because of oil .
You cant help but think that .
You talk about it .
Its in the forefront of your mind always .
You say ,  How is that possible ? 
And this man , hes every man  -  -  your grandfather , your uncle , your father , your son , your neighbor , your professor , your student .
Once a life of happiness and joy and suddenly , pain and sorrow .
Everyone in your country has been touched by the violence , the bloodshed , the pain , the horror , everybody .
Not a single person in your country has not been touched .
But theres something else .
Theres something else about these people , these Americans who are there .
Theres something else about them that you see  -  -  they dont see themselves .
And what do you see ? Theyre Christians .
Theyre Christians .
They worship the Christian God , they have crosses , they carry Bibles .
Their Bibles have a little insignia that says  U.S . Army  on them .
And their leaders , their leaders : before they send their sons and daughters off to war in your country  -  -  and you know the reason  -  -  before they send them off , they go to a Christian church , and they pray to their Christian God , and they ask for protection and guidance from that god .
Why ?
Well , obviously , when people die in the war , they are Muslims , they are Iraqis  -  -  theyre not Americans .
You dont want Americans to die . Protect our troops .
And you feel something about that  -  -  of course you do .
And they do wonderful things .
You read about it , you hear about it .
Theyre there to build schools and help people , and thats what they want to do .
They do wonderful things , but they also do the bad things , and you cant tell the difference .
And this guy , you get a guy like Lt . Gen. William Boykin .
I mean , heres a guy who says that your God is a false God .
Your Gods an idol ; his God is the true God .
The solution to the problem in the Middle East , according to him , is to convert you all to Christianity  -  -  just get rid of your religion .
And you know that . Americans dont read about this guy .
They dont know anything about him , but you do .
You pass it around . You pass his words around .
I mean this is serious . Youre afraid .
He was one of the leading commanders in the second invasion of Iraq .
And youre thinking ,  God , if this guy is saying that , then all the soldiers must be saying that . 
And this word here , George Bush called this war a crusade .
Man , the Americans , theyre just like ,  Ah , crusade .
Whatever . I dont know . 
You know what it means .
Its a holy war against Muslims .
Look , invade , subdue them , take their resources .
If they wont submit , kill them .
Thats what this is about .
And youre thinking ,  My God , these Christians are coming to kill us . 
This is frightening .
You feel frightened . Of course you feel frightened .
And this man , Terry Jones : I mean heres a guy who wants to burn Korans , right ?
And the Americans :  Ah , hes a knucklehead .
Hes a former hotel manager ; hes got three - dozen members of his church . 
They laugh him off . You dont laugh him off .
Because in the context of everything else , all the pieces fit .
I mean , of course , this is how Americans take it , so people all over the Middle East , not just in your country , are protesting .
 He wants to burn Korans , our holy book .
These Christians , who are these Christians ?
Theyre so evil , theyre so mean  -  -  this is what theyre about . 
This is what youre thinking as an Arab Muslim , as an Iraqi .
Of course youre going to think this .
And then your cousin says ,  Hey cuz , check out this website .
Youve got to see this  -  -  Bible Boot Camp .
These Christians are nuts .
Theyre training their little kids to be soldiers for Jesus .
And they take these little kids and they run them through these things till they teach them how to say ,  Sir , yes , sir ,  and things like grenade toss and weapons care and maintenance .
And go to the website .
It says  U.S . Army  right on it .
I mean , these Christians , theyre nuts . How would they do this to their little kids ? 
And youre reading this website .
And of course , Christians back in the United States , or anybody , says ,  Ah , this is some little , tiny church in the middle of nowhere . 
You dont know that .
For you , this is like all Christians .
Its all over the Web , Bible Boot Camp .
And look at this : they even teach their kids  -  -  they train them in the same way the U.S . Marines train .
Isnt that interesting .
And it scares you , and it frightens you .
So these guys , you see them .
You see , I , Sam Richards , I know who these guys are .
Theyre my students , my friends .
I know what theyre thinking :  You dont know . 
When you see them , theyre something else , theyre something else .
Thats what they are to you .
We dont see it that way in the United States , but you see it that way .
So here .
Of course , you got it wrong .
Youre generalizing . Its wrong .
You dont understand the Americans .
Its not a Christian invasion .
Were not just there for oil ; were there for lots of reasons .
You have it wrong . Youve missed it .
And of course , most of you dont support the insurgency ; you dont support killing Americans ; you dont support the terrorists .
Of course you dont . Very few people do .
But some of you do .
And this is a perspective .
Okay , so now , heres what were going to do .
Step outside of your shoes that youre in right now and step back into your normal shoes .
So everyones back in the room , okay .
Now here comes the radical experiment .
So were all back home .
This photo : this woman , man , I feel her .
I feel her .
Shes my sister , my wife , my cousin , my neighbor .
Shes anybody to me .
These guys standing there , everybody in the photo , I feel this photo , man .
So heres what I want you to do .
Lets go back to my first example of the Chinese .
So I want you to go there .
So its all about coal , and the Chinese are here in the United States .
And what I want you to do is picture her as a Chinese woman receiving a Chinese flag because her loved one has died in America in the coal uprising .
And the soldiers are Chinese , and everybody else is Chinese .
As an American , how do you feel about this picture ?
What do you think about that scene ?
Okay , try this . Bring it back .
This is the scene here .
Its an American , American soldiers , American woman who lost her loved one in the Middle East  -  -  in Iraq or Afghanistan .
Now , put yourself in the shoes , go back to the shoes of an Arab Muslim living in Iraq .
What are you feeling and thinking about this photo , about this woman ?
Okay , now follow me on this , because Im taking a big risk here .
And so Im going to invite you to take a risk with me .
These gentlemen here , theyre insurgents .
They were caught by the American soldiers , trying to kill Americans .
And maybe they succeeded . Maybe they succeeded .
Put yourself in the shoes of the Americans who caught them .
Can you feel the rage ?
Can you feel that you just want to take these guys and wring their necks ?
Can you go there ?
It shouldnt be that difficult .
You just  -  -  oh , man .
Now , put yourself in their shoes .
Are they brutal killers or patriotic defenders ?
Which one ?
Can you feel their anger , their fear , their rage at what has happened in their country ?
Can you imagine that maybe one of them in the morning bent down to their child and hugged their child and said ,  Dear , Ill be back later .
Im going out to defend your freedom , your lives .
Im going out to look out for us , the future of our country . 
Can you imagine that ?
Can you imagine saying that ?
Can you go there ?
What do you think theyre feeling ?
You see , thats empathy .
Its also understanding .
Now , you might ask ,  Okay , Sam , so why do you do this sort of thing ?
Why would you use this example of all examples ? 
And I say , because ... because .
Youre allowed to hate these people .
Youre allowed to just hate them with every fiber of your being .
And if I can get you to step into their shoes and walk an inch , one tiny inch , then imagine the kind of sociological analysis that you can do in all other aspects of your life .
You can walk a mile when it comes to understanding why that persons driving 40 miles per hour in the passing lane , or your teenage son , or your neighbor who annoys you by cutting his lawn on Sunday mornings .
Whatever it is , you can go so far .
And this is what I tell my students : step outside of your tiny , little world .
Step inside of the tiny , little world of somebody else .
And then do it again and do it again and do it again .
And suddenly all these tiny , little worlds , they come together in this complex web .
And they build a big , complex world .
And suddenly , without realizing it , youre seeing the world differently .
Everything has changed .
Everything in your life has changed .
And thats , of course , what this is about .
Attend to other lives , other visions .
Listen to other people , enlighten ourselves .
Im not saying that I support the terrorists in Iraq , but as a sociologist , what I am saying is I understand .
And now perhaps  -  -  perhaps  -  -  you do too .
Thank you .
Robin Ince : Science versus wonder ?
Does science ruin the magic of life ? In this grumpy but charming monologue , Robin Ince makes the argument against . The more we learn about the astonishing behavior of the universe  -  -  the more we stand in awe .
Id like to apologize , first of all , to all of you because I have no form of PowerPoint presentation .
So what Im going to do is , every now and again , I will make this gesture , and in a moment of PowerPoint democracy , you can imagine what youd like to see .
I do a radio show .
The radio show is called  The Infinite Monkey Cage . 
Its about science , its about rationalism .
So therefore , we get a lot of complaints every single week  -  -  complaints including one we get very often , which is to say the very title ,  Infinite Monkey Cage ,  celebrates the idea of vivisection .
We have made it quite clear to these people that an infinite monkey cage is roomy .
We also had someone else who said ,  The Infinite Monkey Cage idea is ridiculous .
An infinite number of monkeys could never write the works of Shakespeare .
We know this because they did an experiment . 
Yes , they gave 12 monkeys a typewriter for a week , and after a week , they only used it as a bathroom .
So the main element though , the main complaint we get  -  -  and one that I find most worrying  -  -  is that people say ,  Oh , why do you insist on ruining the magic ?
You bring in science , and it ruins the magic . 
Now Im an arts graduate ; I love myth and magic and existentialism and self - loathing .
Thats what I do .
But I also dont understand how it does ruin the magic .
All of the magic , I think , that may well be taken away by science is then replaced by something as wonderful .
Astrology , for instance : like many rationalists , Im a Pisces .
Now astrology  -  -  we remove the banal idea that your life could be predicted ; that youll , perhaps today , meet a lucky man whos wearing a hat .
That is gone .
But if we want to look at the sky and see predictions , we still can .
We can see predictions of galaxies forming , of galaxies colliding into each other , of new solar systems .
This is a wonderful thing .
If the Sun could one day  -  -  and indeed the Earth , in fact  -  -  if the Earth could read its own astrological , astronomical chart , one day it would say ,  Not a good day for making plans .
Youll been engulfed by a red giant . 
And that to me as well , that if you think Im worried about losing worlds , well Many Worlds theory  -  -  one of the most beautiful , fascinating , sometimes terrifying ideas from the quantum interpretation  -  -  is a wonderful thing .
That every person here , every decision that youve made today , every decision youve made in your life , youve not really made that decision , but in fact , every single permutation of those decisions is made , each one going off into a new universe .
That is a wonderful idea .
If you ever think that your life is rubbish , always remember theres another you thats made much worse decisions than that .
If you ever think ,  Ah , I want to end it all ,  dont end it all .
Remember that in the majority of universes , you dont even exist in the first place .
This to me , in its own strange way , is very , very comforting .
Now reincarnation , thats another thing gone  -  -  the afterlife .
But its not gone .
Science actually says we will live forever .
Well , there is one proviso .
We wont actually live forever . You wont live forever .
Your consciousness , the you - ness of you , the me - ness of me  -  -  that gets this one go .
But every single thing that makes us , every atom in us , has already created a myriad of different things and will go on to create a myriad of new things .
We have been mountains and apples and pulsars and other peoples knees .
Who knows , maybe one of your atoms was once Napoleons knee .
That is a good thing .
Unlike the occupants of the universe , the universe itself is not wasteful .
We are all totally recyclable .
And when we die , we dont even have to be placed in different refuse sacs .
This is a wonderful thing .
Understanding , to me , does not remove the wonder and the joy .
For instance , my wife could turn to me and she may say ,  Why do you love me ? 
And I can with all honesty look her in the eye and say ,  Because our pheromones matched our olfactory receptors . 
Though Ill probably also say something about her hair and personality as well .
And that is a wonderful thing there .
Love does not die because of that thing .
Pain doesnt go away either .
This is a terrible thing , even though I understand pain .
If someone punches me  -  -  and because of my personality , this is recently a regular occurrence  -  -  I understand where the pain comes from .
It is basically momentum to energy where the four - vector is constant  -  -  thats what it is .
But at no point can I react and go ,  Ha ! Is that the best momentum - to - energy fourth vector constant youve got ? 
No , I just spit out a tooth .
And that is all of these different things  -  -  the love for my child .
I have a son . His name is Archie .
Im very lucky , because hes better than all the other children .
Now I know you dont think that .
You may well have your own children and think ,  Oh no , my childs best . 
Thats the wonderful thing about evolution  -  -  the predilection to believe that our child is best .
Now in many ways , thats just a survival thing .
The fact we see here is the vehicle for our genes , and therefore we love it .
But we dont notice that bit ; we just unconditionally love .
That is a wonderful thing .
Though I should say that my son is best and is better than your children .
Ive done some tests .
And all of these things to me give such joy and excitement and wonder .
Even quantum mechanics can give you an excuse for bad housework , for instance .
Perhaps youve been at home for a week on your own .
You house is in a terrible state .
Your partner is about to return .
You think , what should I do ?
Do nothing .
All you have to do is , when she walks in , using a quantum interpretation , say ,  Im so sorry .
I stopped observing the house for a moment , and when I started observing again , everything had happened . 
Thats the strong anthropic principle of vacuuming .
For me , its a very , very important thing .
Even on my journey up here  -  -  the joy that I have on my journey up here every single time .
If you actually think , you remove the myth and there is still something wonderful .
Im sitting on a train .
Every time I breathe in , Im breathing in a million - billion - billion atoms of oxygen .
Im sitting on a chair .
Even though I know the chair is made of atoms and therefore actually in many ways empty space , I find it comfortable .
I look out the window , and I realize that every single time we stop and I look out that window , framed in that window , wherever we are , I am observing more life than there is in the rest of the known universe beyond the planet Earth .
If you go to the safari parks on Saturn or Jupiter , you will be disappointed .
And I realize Im observing this with the brain , the human brain , the most complex thing in the known universe .
That , to me , is an incredible thing .
And do you know what , that might be enough .
Steven Weinberg , the Nobel laureate , once said ,  The more the universe seems comprehensible , the more it seems pointless . 
Now for some people , that seems to lead to an idea of nihilism .
But for me , it doesnt . That is a wonderful thing .
Im glad the universe is pointless .
It means if I get to the end of my life , the universe cant turn to me and go ,  What have you been doing , you idiot ?
Thats not the point . 
I can make my own purpose .
You can make your own purpose .
We have the individual power to go ,  This is what I want to do . 
And in a pointless universe , that , to me , is a wonderful thing .
I have chosen to make silly jokes about quantum mechanics and the Copenhagen interpretation .
You , I imagine , can do much better things with your time .
Thank you very much . Goodbye .
Renny Gleeson : 404 , the story of a page not found
Oops ! Nobody wants to see the 404 : Page Not Found . But as Renny Gleeson shows us , while he runs through a slideshow of creative and funny 404 pages , every error is really a chance to build a better relationship .
So what I want to try to do is tell a quick story about a 404 page and a lesson that was learned as a result of it .
But to start it probably helps to have an understanding of what a 404 page actually is .
The 404 page is that .
Its that broken experience on the Web .
Its effectively the default page when you ask a website for something and it cant find it .
And it serves you the 404 page .
Its inherently a feeling of being broken when you go through it .
And I just want you to think a little bit about , remember for yourself , its annoying when you hit this thing .
Because its the feeling of a broken relationship .
And thats where its actually also interesting to think about , where does 404 come from ?
Its from a family of errors actually  -  -  a whole set of relationship errors , which , when I started digging into them , it looks almost like a checklist for a sex therapist or a couples couselor .
You sort of get down there to the bottom and things get really dicey .
Yes .
But these things are everywhere .
Theyre on sites big , theyre on sites small .
This is a global experience .
What a 404 page tells you is that you fell through the cracks .
And thats not a good experience when youre used to experiences like this .
You can get on your Kinect and you can have unicorns dancing and rainbows spraying out of your mobile phone .
A 404 page is not what youre looking for .
You get that , and its like a slap in the face .
Trying to think about how a 404 felt , and it would be like if you went to Starbucks and theres the guy behind the counter and youre over there and theres no skim milk .
And you say ,  Hey , could you bring the skim milk ? 
And they walk out from behind the counter and theyve got no pants on .
And youre like ,  Oh , I didnt want to see that . 
Thats the 404 feeling .
I mean , Ive heard about that .
So where this comes into play and why this is important is I head up a technology incubator , and we had eight startups sitting around there .
And those startups are focused on what they are , not what theyre not , until one day Athletepath , which is a website that focuses on services for extreme athletes , found this video .
Joey !
Crowd : Whoa !
Renny Gleeson : You just ... no , hes not okay .
They took that video and they embedded it in their 404 page and it was like a light bulb went off for everybody in the place .
Because finally there was a page that actually felt like what it felt like to hit a 404 .
So this turned into a contest .
Dailypath that offers inspiration put inspiration on their 404 page .
Stayhound , which helps you find pet sitters through your social network , commiserated with your pet .
Each one of them found this .
It turned into a 24 - hour contest .
At 4 : 04 the next day , we gave out $ 404 in cash .
And what they learned was that those little things , done right , actually matter , and that well - designed moments can build brands .
So you take a look out in the real world , and the fun thing is you can actually hack these yourself .
You can type in an URL and put in a 404 and these will pop .
This is one that commiserates with you .
This is one that blames you .
This is one that I loved .
This is an error page , but what if this error page was also an opportunity ?
So it was a moment in time where all of these startups had to sit and think and got really excited about what they could be .
Because back to the whole relationship issue , what they figured out through this exercise was that a simple mistake can tell me what youre not , or it can remind me of why I should love you .
Thank you .
Amber Case : We are all cyborgs now
Technology is evolving us , says Amber Case , as we become a screen - staring , button - clicking new version of homo sapiens . We now rely on  external brains  to communicate , remember , even live out secondary lives . But will these machines ultimately connect or conquer us ? Case offers surprising insight into our cyborg selves .
I would like to tell you all that you are all actually cyborgs , but not the cyborgs that you think .
Youre not RoboCop , and youre not Terminator , but youre cyborgs every time you look at a computer screen or use one of your cell phone devices .
So whats a good definition for cyborg ?
Well , traditional definition is  an organism to which exogenous components have been added for the purpose of adapting to new environments . 
That came from a 1960 paper on space travel , because , if you think about it , space is pretty awkward .
People arent supposed to be there .
But humans are curious , and they like to add things to their bodies so they can go to the Alps one day and then become a fish in the sea the next .
So lets look at the concept of traditional anthropology .
Somebody goes to another country , says ,  How fascinating these people are , how interesting their tools are , how curious their culture is . 
And then they write a paper , and maybe a few other anthropologists read it , and we think its very exotic .
Well , whats happening is that weve suddenly found a new species .
I , as a cyborg anthropologist , have suddenly said ,  Oh , wow . Now suddenly were a new form of Homo sapiens , and look at these fascinating cultures , and look at these curious rituals that everybodys doing around this technology .
Theyre clicking on things and staring at screens . 
Now theres a reason why I study this , versus traditional anthropology .
And the reason is that tool use , in the beginning  -  -  for thousands and thousands of years , everything has been a physical modification of self .
It has helped us to extend our physical selves , go faster , hit things harder , and theres been a limit on that .
But now what were looking at is not an extension of the physical self , but an extension of the mental self , and because of that , were able to travel faster , communicate differently .
And the other thing that happens is that were all carrying around little Mary Poppins technology .
We can put anything we want into it , and it doesnt get heavier , and then we can take anything out .
What does the inside of your computer actually look like ?
Well , if you print it out , it looks like a thousand pounds of material that youre carrying around all the time .
And if you actually lose that information , it means that you suddenly have this loss in your mind , that you suddenly feel like somethings missing , except you arent able to see it , so it feels like a very strange emotion .
The other thing that happens is that you have a second self .
Whether you like it or not , youre starting to show up online , and people are interacting with your second self when youre not there .
And so you have to be careful about leaving your front lawn open , which is basically your Facebook wall , so that people dont write on it in the middle of the night  -  -  because its very much the equivalent .
And suddenly we have to start to maintain our second self .
You have to present yourself in digital life in a similar way that you would in your analog life .
So , in the same way that you wake up , take a shower and get dressed , you have to learn to do that for your digital self .
And the problem is that a lot of people now , especially adolescents , have to go through two adolescences .
They have to go through their primary one , thats already awkward , and then they go through their second selfs adolescence , and thats even more awkward because theres an actual history of what theyve gone through online .
And anybody coming in new to technology is an adolescent online right now , and so its very awkward , and its very difficult for them to do those things .
So when I was little , my dad would sit me down at night and he would say ,  Im going to teach you about time and space in the future . 
And I said ,  Great . 
And he said one day ,  Whats the shortest distance between two points ? 
And I said ,  Well , thats a straight line . You told me that yesterday . 
I thought I was very clever .
He said ,  No , no , no . Heres a better way . 
He took a piece of paper , drew A and B on one side and the other and folded them together so where A and B touched .
And he said ,  That is the shortest distance between two points . 
And I said ,  Dad , dad , dad , how do you do that ? 
He said ,  Well , you just bend time and space , it takes an awful lot of energy , and thats just how you do it . 
And I said ,  I want to do that . 
And he said ,  Well , okay . 
And so , when I went to sleep for the next 10 or 20 years , I was thinking at night ,  I want to be the first person to create a wormhole , to make things accelerate faster .
And I want to make a time machine . 
I was always sending messages to my future self using tape recorders .
But then what I realized when I went to college is that technology doesnt just get adopted because it works .
It gets adopted because people use it and its made for humans .
So I started studying anthropology .
And when I was writing my thesis on cell phones , I realized that everyone was carrying around wormholes in their pockets .
They werent physically transporting themselves ; they were mentally transporting themselves .
They would click on a button , and they would be connected as A to B immediately .
And I thought ,  Oh , wow . I found it . This is great . 
So over time , time and space have compressed because of this .
You can stand on one side of the world , whisper something and be heard on the other .
One of the other ideas that comes around is that you have a different type of time on every single device that you use .
Every single browser tab gives you a different type of time .
And because of that , you start to dig around for your external memories  -  -  where did you leave them ?
So now were all these paleontologists that are digging for things that weve lost on our external brains that were carrying around in our pockets .
And that incites a sort of panic architecture  -  -   Oh no , wheres this thing ? 
Were all  I Love Lucy  on a great assembly line of information , and we cant keep up .
And so what happens is , when we bring all that into the social space , we end up checking our phones all the time .
So we have this thing called ambient intimacy .
Its not that were always connected to everybody , but at anytime we can connect to anyone we want .
And if you were able to print out everybody in your cell phone , the room would be very crowded .
These are the people that you have access to right now , in general  -  -  all of these people , all of your friends and family that you can connect to .
And so there are some psychological effects that happen with this .
One Im really worried about is that people arent taking time for mental reflection anymore , and that they arent slowing down and stopping , being around all those people in the room all the time that are trying to compete for their attention on the simultaneous time interfaces , paleontology and panic architecture .
Theyre not just sitting there .
And really , when you have no external input , that is a time when there is a creation of self , when you can do long - term planning , when you can try and figure out who you really are .
And then , once you do that , you can figure out how to present your second self in a legitimate way , instead of just dealing with everything as it comes in  -  -  and oh , I have to do this , and I have to do this , and I have to do this .
And so this is very important .
Im really worried that , especially kids today , theyre not going to be dealing with this down - time , that they have an instantaneous button - clicking culture , and that everything comes to them , and that they become very excited about it and very addicted to it .
So if you think about it , the world hasnt stopped either .
It has its own external prosthetic devices , and these devices are helping us all to communicate and interact with each other .
But when you actually visualize it , all the connections that were doing right now  -  -  this is an image of the mapping of the Internet  -  -  it doesnt look technological .
It actually looks very organic .
This is the first time in the entire history of humanity that weve connected in this way .
And its not that machines are taking over .
Its that theyre helping us to be more human , helping us to connect with each other .
The most successful technology gets out of the way and helps us live our lives .
And really , it ends up being more human than technology , because were co - creating each other all the time .
And so this is the important point that I like to study : that things are beautiful , that its still a human connection  -  -  its just done in a different way .
Were just increasing our humanness and our ability to connect with each other , regardless of geography .
So thats why I study cyborg anthropology .
Thank you .
Diana Nyad : Extreme swimming with the worlds most dangerous jellyfish
In the 1970s , Diana Nyad set long - distance swim records that are still unbroken . Thirty years later , at 60 , she attempted her longest swim yet , from Cuba to Florida . In this funny , powerful talk at TEDMED , she talks about how to prepare mentally to achieve an extreme dream , and asks : What will YOU do with your wild , precious life ?
Yeah , so a couple of years ago I was turning 60 , and I dont like being 60 .
And I started grappling with this existential angst of what little I had done with my life .
It wasnt the resume of breaking this record here , it was more like , who had I become ?
How had I spent my valuable time ?
How could this have gone by like lightning ?
And I couldnt forgive myself for the countless , countless hours I had lost in negative thought  -  -  all the time I had spent beating myself up for losing my marriage and not stopping the sexual abuse when I was a kid and career moves and this and this and this .
Just why , why didnt I do it better ? Why ? Why ? Why ?
And then my mother died at 82 .
And so I starting thinking , not only am I not happy with the past , now Im getting choked with ,  Ive only got 22 years left . 
What am I going to do with this short amount of time thats just fleeting ?
And Im not in the present whatsoever .
And I decided the remedy to all this malaise was going to be for me to chase an elevated dream , an extreme dream , something that would require utter conviction and unwavering passion , something that would make me be my best self in every aspect of my life , every minute of every day , because the dream was so big that I couldnt get there without that kind of behavior and that kind of conviction .
And I decided , it was an old dream that was lingering , that was from so many years ago , three decades ago  -  -  the only sort of world class swim I had tried and failed at back in my 20s  -  -  was going from Cuba to Florida .
It was deep in my imagination .
No ones ever done it without a shark cage .
Its daunting .
Its more than a hundred miles across a difficult passage of ocean .
Its probably , at my speed , at my age  -  -  for anybodys speed at anybodys age  -  -  going to take 60 , maybe 70 , hours of continuous swimming , never getting out on the boat .
And I started to train .
I hadnt swum for 31 years , not a stroke .
And I had kept in good shape , but swimmings a whole different animal .
As a matter of fact , this picture is supposed to be me during training .
Its a smiling face .
And when youre training for this sport , you are not smiling .
Its an arduous , difficult sport , and I dont remember smiling at any time during this sport .
As I said , I respect other sports , and I compare this sport sometimes to cycling and to mountain climbing and other of the expedition type events , but this is a sensory deprivation , a physical duress .
And when I started in with the eight hours and the 10 hours and the 12 hours and the 14 hours and the 15 hours and the 24 - hour swims , I knew I had it , because I was making it through these .
And when I said Im going to go out and do a 15 - hour swim , and were coming into the dock after a long day and its now night , and we come in and its 14 hours and 58 minutes and I can touch the dock and were done , the trainer says ,  Thats great .
Its 14 hours 58 minutes . Who cares the last two minutes ? 
I say ,  No , its got to be 15 hours ,  and I swim another minute out and another minute back to make the 15 hours .
And I put together an expedition .
Its not that I didnt have help , but honestly , I sort of led , I was the team leader .
And to get the government permissions , you read in the paper , you think its easy to get into Cuba everyday ?
Try going in with an armada like we had of 50 people and five boats and CNNs crew , etc .
The navigation is difficult .
Theres a big river called the Gulf Stream that runs across and its not going in the direction you are .
Its going to the east and youd like to go north .
Its tricky .
And theres dehydration .
And theres hypothermia .
And there are sharks .
And there are all kinds of problems .
And I gathered together , honestly , the worlds leading experts in every possible way .
And a month ago , the 23rd of September , I stood on that shore and I looked across to that long , long faraway horizon and I asked myself , do you have it ?
Are your shoulders ready ?
And they were . They were prepared .
No stone left unturned .
Was the mind ready ?
You know , youre swimming with the fogged goggles , youre swimming at 60 strokes a minute , so youre never really focused on anything , you dont see well .
Youve got tight bathing caps over your ears trying to keep the heat of the head , because its where the hypothermia starts , and so you dont hear very well .
Youre really left alone with your own thoughts .
And I had all kinds of counting systems ready there in English , followed by German , followed by Spanish , followed by French .
You save the French for last .
And I had songs , I had a playlist in my head  -  -  not through headphones , in my own head  -  -  of 65 songs .
And I couldnt wait to get into the dark in the middle of the night , because thats when Neil Young comes out .
And its odd , isnt it ?
Youd think youd be singing Leonard Cohens  Hallelujah  out in the majesty of the ocean , not songs about heroin addiction in New York City .
But no , for some reason I couldnt wait to get into the dark of the night and be singing ,  A heard you knocking at my cellar door I love you baby and I want some more Ooh , ooh , the damage done  The night before I started , I finished Stephen Hawkings  The Grand Design . 
And I couldnt wait to trip the mind fantastic .
About the 50th hour , I was going to start thinking about the edge of the universe .
Is there an edge ?
Is this an envelope were living inside of , or no , does it go onto infinity in both time and space ?
And theres nothing like swimming for 50 hours in the ocean that gets you thinking about things like this .
I couldnt wait to prove the athlete I am , that nobody else in the world can do this swim .
And I knew I could do it .
And when I jumped into that water , I yelled in my mothers French ,  Courage ! 
And I started swimming , and , oh my God , it was glassy .
And we knew it , all 50 people on the boat , we all knew this was it , this was our time .
And I reminded myself a couple hours in , you know , the sport is sort of a microcosm of life itself .
First of all , youre going to hit obstacles .
And even though youre feeling great at any one moment , dont take it for granted , be ready , because theres going to be pain , theres going to be suffering .
Its not going to feel this good all the way across .
And I was thinking of the hypothermia and maybe some shoulder pain and all the other things  -  -  the vomiting that comes from being in the saltwater .
Youre immersed in the liquid .
Your body doesnt like the saltwater .
After a couple of days , three days , you tend to rebel in a lot of physical ways .
But no , two hours in , wham ! Never in my life ...
I knew there were Portuguese men o war , all kinds of moon jellies , all kinds of things , but the box jellyfish from the southern oceans is not supposed to be in these waters .
And I was on fire  -  -  excruciating , excruciating pain .
I dont know if you can still see the red line here and up the arm .
Evidently , a piece this big of tentacle has a hundred - thousand little barbs on it and each barb is not just stinging your skin , its sending a venom .
The most venomous animal that lives in the ocean is the box jellyfish .
And every one of those barbs is sending that venom into this central nervous system .
So first I feel like boiling hot oil , Ive been dipped in .
And Im yelling out ,  Fire ! Fire ! Fire ! Fire !
Help me ! Somebody help me ! 
And the next thing is paralysis .
I feel it in the back and then I feel it in the chest up here , and I cant breathe .
And now Im not swimming with a nice long stroke , Im sort of crabbing it this way .
Then come convulsions .
A young man on our boat is an EMT . He dives in to try to help me .
Hes stung .
They drag him out on the boat , and hes  -  -  evidently , I didnt see any of this  -  -  but lying on the boat and giving himself epinephrine shots and crying out .
Hes 29 years old , very well - built , lean , hes six - foot , five , weighs 265 lbs . , and he is down .
And he is crying and hes yelling to my trainer whos trying to help me .
And hes saying ,  Bonnie , I think Im going to die .
My breath is down to three breaths a minute .
I need help , and I cant help Diana . 
So that was at eight oclock at night .
The doctor , medical team from University of Miami arrived at five in the morning .
So I swam through the night , and at dawn they got there and they started with prednisone shots .
I didnt get out , but was in the water taking prednisone shots , taking Xanax , oxygen to the face .
It was like an ICU unit in the water .
And I guess the story is that even Navy SEALS who are stung by the box jelly , theyre done .
They either die or they quickly get to a hospital .
And I swam through the night and I swam through the next day .
And the next night at dusk , again , wham !
The box jelly again  -  -  all across the neck , all across here .
And this time , I dont like it , I didnt want to give into it , but theres a difference between a non - stop swim and a staged swim .
And I gave in to the staged swim .
And they got me out and they started again with the epinephrine and the prednisone and with the oxygen and with everything they had on board .
And I got back in .
And I swam through that night and into the next day .
And at 41 hours , this body couldnt make it .
The devastation of those stings had taken the respiratory system down so that I couldnt make the progress I wanted .
And the dream was crushed .
And how odd is this intelligent person who put this together and got all these world experts together .
And I knew about the jellyfish , but I was sort of cavalier .
A lot of athletes have this , you know , sort of invincibility .
They should worry about me . I dont worry about them .
Ill just swim right through them .
Weve got benadryl on board . If I get stung , Ill just grin and bear it .
Well there was no grin and bearing this .
As a matter of fact , the best advice I got was from an elementary school class in the Caribbean .
And I was telling these kids , 120 of them  -  -  they were all in the school on the gymnasium floor  -  -  and I was telling them about the jellyfish and how theyre gelatinous and you cant see them at night especially .
And they have these long 30 to 40 to 50 - ft . tentacles .
And they do this wrapping .
And they can send the poison into the system .
And a little kid from the back was like this .
And I said ,  Whats your name ?   Henry . 
 Henry , whats your question ? 
He said ,  Well , I didnt have a question so much as I had a suggestion . 
He said ,  You know those guys who really believe in what they believe in and so they wear bombs ? 
And I said ,  Well its odd that youve learned of this as a noble kind of pursuit , but yeah , I know those guys . 
He said ,  Thats what you need .
You need like a school of fish that would swim in front of you like this . 
 And when the jellyfish come and they wrap their tentacles around the fish , theyre going to be busy with them , and youll just scoot around . 
I said ,  Oh , its like a suicide army . 
He said ,  Thats what Im talking about . Thats what you need . 
And little did I know , that you should listen to eight year - olds .
And so I started that swim in a bathing suit like normal , and , no joke , this is it ; it came from the shark divers .
I finished the swim like this .
I was swimming with this thing on .
Thats how scared of the jellyfish I was .
So now what do I do ?
I wouldnt mind if every one of you came up on this stage tonight and told us how youve gotten over the big disappointments of your lives .
Because weve all had them , havent we ?
Weve all had a heartache .
And so my journey now is to find some sort of grace in the face of this defeat .
And I can look at the journey , not just the destination .
I can feel proud . I can stand here in front of you tonight and say I was courageous .
Yeah .
Thank you .
And with all sincerity , I can say , I am glad I lived those two years of my life that way , because my goal to not suffer regrets anymore , I got there with that goal .
When you live that way , when you live with that kind of passion , theres no time , theres no time for regrets , youre just moving forward .
And I want to live every day of the rest of my life that way , swim or no swim .
But the difference in accepting this particular defeat is that sometimes , if cancer has won , if theres death and we have no choice , then grace and acceptance are necessary .
But that oceans still there .
This hope is still alive .
And I dont want to be the crazy woman who does it for years and years and years , and tries and fails and tries and fails and tries and fails , but I can swim from Cuba to Florida , and I will swim from Cuba to Florida .
Thank you .
Thank you .
Thank you .
And so , what after that ?
Are you going to swim the Atlantic ?
No , thats the last swim .
Its the only swim Im interested in .
But Im ready .
And by the way , a reporter called me the other day and he said he looked on Wikipedia and he said he saw my birthday was August 22nd 1949 , and for some odd reason in Wikipedia , they had my death date too .
He said ,  Did you know youre going to die the same place you were born , New York City , and its going to be in January of 35 ? 
I said ,  Nope . I didnt know . 
And now Im going to live to 85 .
I have three more years than I thought .
And so I ask myself , Im starting to ask myself now , even before this extreme dream gets achieved for me , Im asking myself , and maybe I can ask you tonight too , to paraphrase the poet Mary Oliver , she says ,  So what is it , what is it youre doing , with this one wild and precious life of yours ? 
Thank you very much .
Thank you . Thank you .
Thank you . Thank you .
Live it large . Live it large .
Liza Donnelly : Drawing on humor for change
New Yorker cartoonist Liza Donnelly shares a portfolio of her wise and funny cartoons about modern life  -  -  and talks about how humor can empower women to change the rules .
I was afraid of womanhood .
Not that Im not afraid now , but Ive learned to pretend .
Ive learned to be flexible .
In fact , Ive developed some interesting tools to help me deal with this fear .
Let me explain .
Back in the 50s and 60s , when I was growing up , little girls were supposed to be kind and thoughtful and pretty and gentle and soft , and we were supposed to fit into roles that were sort of shadowy  -  -  really not quite clear what we were supposed to be .
There were plenty of role models all around us .
We had our mothers , our aunts , our cousins , our sisters , and of course , the ever - present media bombarding us with images and words , telling us how to be .
Now my mother was different .
She was a homemaker , but she and I didnt go out and do girlie things together , and she didnt buy me pink outfits .
Instead , she knew what I needed , and she bought me a book of cartoons .
And I just ate it up .
I drew , and I drew , and since I knew that humor was acceptable in my family , I could draw , do what I wanted to do , and not have to perform , not have to speak  -  -  I was very shy  -  -  and I could still get approval .
I was launched as a cartoonist .
Now when were young , we dont always know . We know there are rules out there , but we dont always know  -  -  we dont perform them right , even though we are imprinted at birth with these things , and were told what the most important color in the world is .
Were told what shape were supposed to be in .
Were told what to wear  -  -   -  -  and how to do our hair  -  -   -  -  and how to behave .
Now the rules that Im talking about are constantly being monitored by the culture .
Were being corrected , and the primary policemen are women , because we are the carriers of the tradition .
We pass it down from generation to generation .
Not only that  -  -  we always have this vague notion that somethings expected of us .
And on top of all off these rules , they keep changing .
We dont know whats going on half the time , so it puts us in a very tenuous position .
Now if you dont like these rules , and many of us dont  -  -  I know I didnt , and I still dont , even though I follow them half the time , not quite aware that Im following them  -  -  what better way than to change them  than  with humor ?
Humor relies on the traditions of a society .
It takes what we know , and it twists it .
It takes the codes of behavior and the codes of dress , and it makes it unexpected , and thats what elicits a laugh .
Now what if you put together women and humor ?
I think you can get change .
Because women are on the ground floor , and we know the traditions so well , we can bring a different voice to the table .
Now I started drawing in the middle of a lot of chaos .
I grew up not far from here in Washington D.C .
during the Civil Rights movement , the assassinations , the Watergate hearings and then the feminist movement , and I think I was drawing , trying to figure out what was going on .
And then also my family was in chaos , and I drew to try to bring my family together  -  -   -  -  try to bring my family together with laughter .
It didnt work .
My parents got divorced , and my sister was arrested .
But I found my place .
I found that I didnt have to wear high heels , I didnt have to wear pink , and I could feel like I fit in .
Now when I was a little older , in my 20s , I realized there are not many women in cartooning .
And I thought ,  Well , maybe I can break the little glass ceiling of cartooning ,  and so I did . I became a cartoonist .
And then I thought  -  -  in my 40s I started thinking ,  Well , why dont I do something ?
I always loved political cartoons , so why dont I do something with the content of my cartoons to make people think about the stupid rules that were following as well as laugh ? 
Now my perspective is a particularly  -  -   -  -  my perspective is a particularly American perspective .
I cant help it . I live here .
Even though Ive traveled a lot , I still think like an American woman .
But I believe that the rules that Im talking about are universal , of course  -  -  that each culture has its different codes of behavior and dress and traditions , and each woman has to deal with these same things that we do here in the U.S .
Consequently , we have .
Women , because were on the ground , we know the tradition .
We have amazing antennae .
Now my work lately has been to collaborate with international cartoonists , which I so enjoy , and its given me a greater appreciation for the power of cartoons to get at the truth , to get at the issues quickly and succinctly .
And not only that , it can get to the viewer through not only the intellect , but through the heart .
My work also has allowed me to collaborate with women cartoonists from across the world  -  -  countries such as Saudi Arabia , Iran , Turkey , Argentina , France  -  -  and we have sat together and laughed and talked and shared our difficulties .
And these women are working so hard to get their voices heard in some very difficult circumstances .
But I feel blessed to be able to work with them .
And we talk about how women have such strong perceptions , because of our tenuous position and our role as tradition - keepers , that we can have the great potential to be change - agents .
And I think , I truly believe , that we can change this thing one laugh at a time .
Thank you .
Jeff Skoll : My journey into movies that matter
Film producer Jeff Skoll talks about his film company , Participant Productions , and the people whove inspired him to do good .
Ive actually been waiting by the phone for a call from TED for years .
And in fact , in 2000 , I was ready to talk about eBay , but no call .
In 2003 , I was ready to do a talk about the Skoll Foundation and social entrepreneurship . No call .
In 2004 , I started Participant Productions and we had a really good first year , and no call .
And finally , I get a call last year , and then I have to go up after J.J. Abrams .
Youve got a cruel sense of humor , TED .
When I first moved to Hollywood from Silicon Valley , I had some misgivings .
But I found that there were some advantages to being in Hollywood .
And , in fact , some advantages to owning your own media company .
And I also found that Hollywood and Silicon Valley have a lot more in common than I would have dreamed .
Hollywood has its sex symbols , and the Valley has its sex symbols .
Hollywood has its rivalries , and the Valley has its rivalries .
Hollywood gathers around power tables , and the Valley gathers around power tables .
So it turned out there was a lot more in common than I would have dreamed .
But Im actually here today to tell a story .
And part of it is a personal story . When Chris invited me to speak , he said , people think of you as a bit of an enigma , and they want to know what drives you a bit .
And what really drives me is a vision of the future that I think we all share .
Its a world of peace and prosperity and sustainability .
And when we heard a lot of the presentations over the last couple of days , Ed Wilson and the pictures of James Nachtwey , I think we all realized how far we have to go to get to this new version of humanity that I like to call  Humanity 2.0 . 
And its also something that resides in each of us , to close what I think are the two big calamities in the world today .
One is the gap in opportunity  -  -  this gap that President Clinton last night called uneven , unfair and unsustainable  -  -  and , out of that , comes poverty and illiteracy and disease and all these evils that we see around us .
But perhaps the other , bigger gap is what we call the hope gap .
And someone , at some point , came up with this very bad idea that an ordinary individual couldnt make a difference in the world .
And I think thats just a horrible thing .